---
title: "Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients."
id: 10638
permalink: /:collection/10638
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Dupuis LL, Robinson PD, Boodhan S, Holdsworth M, Portwine C, Gibson P, Phillips R, Maan C, Stefin N, Sung L. Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients. Toronto (ON): Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO); 2014 Apr 23. 57 p. [99 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Regulatory Alert

## FDA Warning/Regulatory Alert



 **Note from the National Guideline Clearinghouse** : This guideline references a drug(s) for which important revised regulatory and/or warning information has been released.

  * [August 31, 2016 – Opioid pain and cough medicines combined with benzodiazepines](http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/SafetyInformation/SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts/ucm518710.htm "FDA Web site"): A U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) review has found that the growing combined used of opioid medicines with benzodiazepines or other drugs that depress the central nervous system (CNS) has resulted in serious side effects, including slowed or difficult breathing and deaths. FDA is adding Boxed Warnings to the drug labeling of prescription opioid pain and prescription opioid cough medicines and benzodiazepines. 



# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Strength of recommendations ( **Strong, Weak** ) and quality of evidence ( **High, Moderate, Low, Very Low** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Health Question #1: What approaches are recommended to prevent the development of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children? 


####  Recommendation 


Control of acute and delayed CINV should be optimized for each child in order to minimize the risk of the child developing anticipatory CINV. ( **Strong Recommendation, Low Quality Evidence** ) 


###  Health Question #2: What interventions are recommended to control anticipatory CINV in children who develop it? 


####  Recommendations 


  * The panel suggests that psychological interventions such as hypnosis or systematic desensitization may be offered to children with anticipatory CINV. ( **Weak Recommendation, Moderate Quality Evidence** ) 
  * The panel suggests that lorazepam in a dose of 0.04 to 0.08 mg/kg/dose (maximum: 2 mg/dose) once at bedtime the night before chemotherapy and once the next day prior to administration of chemotherapy may be used to prevent or treat anticipatory CINV in children. ( **Weak Recommendation, Low Quality of Evidence** ) 




###  Definitions: 


**Quality of Evidence**
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    High Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Moderate Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Low Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Very Low Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Any estimate of effect is very uncertain
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  Strength of Recommendations 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Strength of Recommendations">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Strong Recommendation
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    When using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE), panels make strong recommendations when they are confident that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Weak Recommendation
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak recommendations indicate that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the panel is less confident.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV)

## Guideline Category

- Management
- Prevention
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Nursing
- Oncology
- Pediatrics
- Preventive Medicine

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Pharmacists
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To optimize the control of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children receiving chemotherapy

**Note** : For the purpose of this guideline, optimal anticipatory CINV control is defined as no vomiting, no retching, no nausea, no use of antiemetic agents other than those given for anticipatory CINV prevention or treatment and no nausea-related change in the child's usual appetite and diet. This level of CINV control is to be achieved during the 24 hours prior to administration of the first antineoplastic agent of the upcoming chemotherapy block.

## Target Population



Children (0 to 18 years) receiving chemotherapy for cancer and who are at risk of experiencing anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV)

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Optimization of control of acute and delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) 
  2. Psychological interventions such as hypnosis or systematic desensitization 
  3. Lorazepam 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Prevalence of and risk factors for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) 
  * Proportion of patients with complete control of anticipatory CINV 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases
- Searches of Unpublished Data

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Identification and Appraisal of Existing Guidelines**

A guideline was sought which could be adapted to the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) context for the management of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV).

  1. **Guideline Search Strategy** : During August and September 2012, the POGO CINV Guideline Development Group conducted a search of bibliographic databases and the grey literature to identify existing practice guidelines for the management of anticipatory CINV in children with cancer. Computerized searches were performed with the assistance of a library scientist using the OVID search platform for the MEDLINE and EMBASE databases. The search engine Google was utilized for identification of grey literature including local, provincial, national and international databases. In addition the panel members reviewed their files for potentially relevant guidelines. The search strategies are provided in Appendix A in the original guideline document. 
  2. **Guideline Selection Criteria and Appraisal** : Guidelines were selected for inclusion that: (i) provided recommendations for the management of anticipatory, breakthrough and/or delayed CINV; (ii) were published in 2008 or more recently; and (iii) were published in English. Financial limitations precluded translation of guidelines published in languages other than English. Guidelines were excluded if it was not clear that the guideline statements or recommendations were based on a review of evidence from the literature and/or were not based on a source that used evidence to support the guideline development process. 



**Systematic Reviews of Primary Studies**

  1. **Prevention and Treatment of Anticipatory CINV** : As none of the guidelines identified specifically addressed the management of anticipatory CINV in children with cancer and there was variability between the adult-focused guidelines on inclusion of studies addressing anticipatory CINV, a systematic review of primary studies evaluating anticipatory CINV in adults and/or children was conducted. 
    1. _Search Strategy_ : The following databases were searched and included articles indexed as of November 28, 2012: OvidSP - MEDLINE, EMBASE & EMBASE Classic, EBM Reviews – Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CCTR), HaPI (Health and Psychosocial Instruments), AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine); EBSCOHost CINAHL; ProQuest Dissertation Abstracts. The search strategies are provided in Appendix C in the original guideline document. 
    2. _Selection Criteria and Appraisal_ : Citations were independently screened for relevancy by two reviewers. All citations identified as potentially relevant by either reviewer were included for full-text screening. Two reviewers independently evaluated the full-text papers to determine whether they met the inclusion criteria. Disagreements were resolved by discussion and consensus. Primary studies were included if they: (i) were published in a journal in full text (i.e., abstracts, letters, book chapters and dissertations were excluded); (ii) were published in English; (iii) evaluated an intervention for the prevention or treatment of anticipatory CINV; (iv) reported the proportion of patients experiencing complete control of anticipatory CINV and (v) the number of participants was >10 per study arm for comparative studies and >2 overall for non-comparative studies. Financial limitations precluded translation of guidelines published in languages other than English. The minimum number of required subjects in included pediatric studies was lower than that for adult studies in recognition of the smaller evidence base in pediatrics and the likelihood that pediatric studies would involve fewer patients than adult studies. 
  2. **Prevalence of Anticipatory CINV Pre-post Use of 5-HT3 Antagonists** : As several of the prominent adult-focused antiemetic guidelines recommend optimal control of acute CINV to prevent anticipatory CINV, a review of primary studies which evaluated the prevalence of anticipatory CINV in adult and pediatric patients was performed. 
    1. _Search Strategy_ : The same set of citations identified by the search strategy for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory CINV systematic review was used, as a very broad search strategy was employed to identify anticipatory CINV studies. The search strategies are provided in Appendix C in the original guideline document. 
    2. _Selection Criteria and Appraisal_ : Citations were independently screened for relevancy by two reviewers. All citations identified as potentially relevant by either reviewer were included for full-text screening. Two reviewers independently evaluated the full-text papers to determine whether they met the inclusion criteria. Disagreements were resolved by discussion and consensus. Studies were included if they were: (i) primary studies that were published in a journal in full text (i.e., abstracts, letters, book chapters and dissertations were excluded); (ii) published in English; (iii) determined the proportion of patients experiencing anticipatory CINV; (iv) the sample size per study arm was ≥10 subjects for pediatric studies and ≥20 subjects for adult only or mixed adult/pediatric studies; and (v) the study inclusion criteria did not specifically select for patients with post-chemotherapy CINV. 



## Number of Source Documents



**Identification and Appraisal of Existing Guidelines**

Nine guidelines that were either developed for use in adults and/or for use in children met the inclusion criteria and were assessed using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation II (AGREE II) instrument. None of the guidelines were selected for adaptation.

**Systematic Reviews of Pediatric and Adult Primary Studies**

  * Interventions to prevention and/or treatment of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV): Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria 
  * Prevalence of anticipatory CINV pre-post use of 5-HT3 antagonists: Fifty studies (reported in 58 papers) met the inclusion criteria 



See Appendix B in the original guideline document for a flowchart that outlines the search strategy for existing guidelines and Appendix C for a flowchart that outlines the search strategy for the systematic review.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Quality of Evidence</strong> </p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">High Quality </th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Moderate Quality </th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Low Quality </th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Very Low Quality </th>
            <td valign="top">Any estimate of effect is very uncertain</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



 **Appraisal of Existing Guidelines**

Each guideline identified through the search was independently reviewed and scored by at least two members of the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) CINV Guideline Development Panel using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation II (AGREE II) instrument. The domains assessed by this instrument include: scope and purpose; stakeholder involvement; rigor; clarity and presentation; applicability, and editorial independence. The domain scores and overall assessments of each reviewer were aggregated and presented for discussion at a panel meeting held by teleconference. The Rigor of Development quality domain score was emphasized. The AGREE scores are presented in Appendix B in the original guideline document. The suitability of each guideline for adaptation using the ADAPTE process was discussed by the panel.

**Systematic Reviews of Primary Studies**

Evidence summary tables of included studies were compiled and reviewed by two panel members before consideration by the panel.

The quality of evidence was assessed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system developed by Guyatt et al. (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field) by one author and confirmed through discussion by the remaining panel members.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **Health Questions**

The guideline sought to answer the following health questions:

  1. What approaches are recommended to prevent the development of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children? 
  2. What interventions are recommended to control anticipatory CINV in children who develop it? 



**Guideline Development Panel**

The Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) identified CINV as a key supportive care initiative in 2008 and the POGO CINV Guideline Development Group was formed in December 2008. Members were selected with a view to obtain inter-disciplinary representation from several POGO institutions as well as content expertise. Experts who had published in the area of CINV in children or who had a current research interest in CINV or supportive care in cancer were invited to join the guideline development group. After the completion of the first two POGO guidelines in the CINV series, panel members were asked to confirm their willingness to continue as members of the panel tasked with development of the third guideline in this series. Two members resigned and two new members were recruited.

**Decision-making Process for Formulation of the Recommendations**

Decisions were taken through panel discussions and any differences in opinion were resolved by consensus. The quality of evidence and strength of recommendations were assessed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system developed by Guyatt et al. by one author and confirmed through discussion by the remaining panel members. If consensus was unable to be reached on any matter, a decision was made by the majority of panel members by a vote.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Strength of Recommendations**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Strong Recommendation
</th>  
<td>

When using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE), panels make strong recommendations when they are confident that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

Weak Recommendation
</th>  
<td>

Weak recommendations indicate that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the panel is less confident.
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



 **External Review and Consultation Process**

**Who Was Asked to Review the Guideline?**

_Content Expert Review_

Physicians, nurses and pharmacists with an active clinical and/or research interest in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) were asked to review the draft guideline.

_External Stakeholder Review_

Health care providers working at the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) tertiary centres and their satellites and members of the POGO Supportive Care Steering Committee were asked to review the draft guideline and complete an online survey. Stakeholders from all 5 tertiary centres and 6 of the 7 satellite centres provided feedback. A total of 25 stakeholders provided survey responses.

**What Process Was Followed?**

The willingness of potential content expert reviewers to review the guideline was determined by contacting them by telephone or e-mail. Once agreement was obtained, the draft guideline was sent electronically along with instructions for the reviewer to complete a survey (see Appendix H in the original guideline document).

Following the content expert review, the draft guideline was sent electronically to health care providers who practice in POGO satellites and tertiary centres together with a request to review the document using a survey (see Appendix I in the original guideline document). Reviewers returned the completed the online survey.

**Discussion of Feedback**

The survey results were discussed in detail by the POGO CINV Guideline Development Panel and a decision on each point was taken by consensus. When the decision of the panel was not unanimous, a revision was made if it was supported by at least 60% of the guideline development panel members. The comments of the expert reviewers led to revisions to the guideline as outlined in Table 3 in the original guideline document and a summary of the expert reviewers' responses to the survey questions is provided in Table 4 in the original guideline document.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Optimizing the control of anticipatory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children receiving chemotherapy

## Potential Harms



Few adverse effects were attributed to lorazepam; mild sedation occurred in 76% of the treatments where lorazepam was given and 32% of the control treatments. The recommended initial lorazepam dose was based on current pediatric dosing recommendations with the usual adult dose as the maximum dose. This dose should be titrated to the needs of each child. For example, if this dose is associated with an unacceptable degree of sedation, lower doses are recommended for subsequent chemotherapy blocks.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



The Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) Guideline for the Prevention and Treatment of Anticipatory Nausea and Vomiting due to Chemotherapy in Pediatric Cancer Patients was developed by health care professionals using evidence-based or best practice references available at the time of its creation. The content of the guideline will change since it will be reviewed and revised on a periodic basis. Care has been taken to ensure accuracy of the information. However, every health care professional using this guideline is responsible for providing care according to their best professional judgement and the policies and standards in place at their own institution.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



 **Guideline Implementation Considerations**

Evidence-based guidelines should be used to select anti-emetic interventions to prevent acute and delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) for the initial chemotherapy. The child's response, as well as evidence-based recommendations, should be used to select antiemetic interventions to prevent acute and delayed CINV for subsequent chemotherapy.

Institutions should evaluate evidence-based guidelines for endorsement or adaptation and should consider developing antiemetic selection order sets or the incorporation of optimal antiemetic prophylaxis into cancer therapy order sets to facilitate their clinical use.

Health care providers should carefully and frequently evaluate CINV severity across all phases (anticipatory, acute and delayed) in children receiving chemotherapy. Particular attention should be paid to determining the incidence of CINV that may occur when the child is not in the inpatient or clinic setting and its severity. These assessments are needed to guide the need for treatment of anticipatory CINV, when present, and the selection of antiemetic prophylaxis for subsequent chemotherapy treatments. Attentive response to the child's overall CINV experience on the part of health care providers will likely minimize the development of anticipatory CINV.

Members of the health care team who have expertise in the provision of the recommended non-pharmacological interventions (hypnosis, systematic desensitization) should be identified and engaged in the care of children with anticipatory CINV.

**Tools for Application**

Meticulous attention to the overall CINV experience (anticipatory, acute and delayed phase) of children receiving chemotherapy is required. Validated screening and assessment tools must be developed to facilitate timely and efficient identification of children who do not experience complete CINV control despite receiving guideline-informed antiemetic prophylaxis. CINV diaries (paper or electronic) should be considered to record and track the experience of patients.

**Organizational Barriers and Cost Implications**

Routine systematic screening of all patients about to receive chemotherapy regarding their experience of anticipatory CINV is critical to the identification of patients who warrant intervention. Each organization should ensure that clinicians accept this as a standard of care and that they have the resources to perform this screening and provide appropriate interventions.

The availability of the resources required to implement the recommendations may be limited at many institutions. Since appropriately trained staff is the primary resource required for the incorporation of non-pharmaceutical interventions to control anticipatory CINV, it is suggested that each institution review the number of available child life specialists, psychologists and nurses with the relevant expertise to deliver these therapies.

Costs related to antiemetic agents, especially those used for acute and delayed phase CINV control, may increase when evidence-based guideline recommendations are followed. These increased costs may be counter-balanced by decreased costs due to improved CINV control.

**Key Review Criteria for Monitoring and/or Audit Purposes**

Routine monitoring and tracking of patients' level of overall CINV control (anticipatory, acute and delayed phase) would not only provide a means to respond to the needs of individual patients but would also provide very much needed information regarding the emetogenicity of chemotherapy regimens in children.

Periodic audits of adherence of antiemetic prescribing to the guideline should be performed at individual institutions. Ideally, each prescriber should receive feed-back regarding the extent of their adherence to the guideline and the rate of complete anticipatory, acute and delayed CINV control seen in their patients.

## Implementation Tools

- Audit Criteria/Indicators
- Quick Reference Guides/Physician Guides

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Living with Illness
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Dupuis LL, Robinson PD, Boodhan S, Holdsworth M, Portwine C, Gibson P, Phillips R, Maan C, Stefin N, Sung L. Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients. Toronto (ON): Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO); 2014 Apr 23. 57 p. [99 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2014 Apr 23

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO)

Ministry of Health and Long Term Care, Ontario

L. Sung and L.L. Dupuis received partial salary support from the Children's Oncology Group

## Guideline Committee



Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) CINV Guideline Development Panel

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Panel Members_ : L. Lee Dupuis, pediatric oncology pharmacist ( _Chair_ ); Sabrina Boodhan, pediatric pharmacist; Paul Gibson, pediatric hematologist/oncologist; Mark Holdsworth, pediatric oncology pharmacist; Bob Phillips, pediatric hematologist/oncologist; Carol Portwine, pediatric hematologist/oncologist; Paula Robinson, guideline methodologist; Lillian Sung, pediatric hematologist/oncologist

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The guideline development panel members had no conflicts of interest with respect to the development of this guideline. All work produced by the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) CINV Guideline Development Panel is editorially independent of its funding agencies.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (POGO) Web site](http://www.pogo.ca/healthcare/practiceguidelines/anticipatorycinv/ "Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario \(POGO\) Web site").

Print copies: Available through the POGO office, 480 University Avenue, Suite 1014, Toronto, ON, CANADA; M5G 1V2 Phone: 416-592-1232; Toll free: 1-855-FOR-POGO (367-7646).

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * Dupuis LL, Robinson PD, Boodhan S, Holdsworth M, Portwine C, Gibson P, Phillips R, Maan C, Stefin N, and Sung L. Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Aug;61(8):1506-12. Electronic copies: Available for purchase from the [Pediatric Blood and Cancer Web site](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pbc.25063/abstract "Pediatric Blood and Cancer Web site"). 



In addition, a suggested criterion for monitoring and/or audit purposes is included in the [original guideline document](http://www.pogo.ca/_media/File/healthcare/guidelines/Anticipatory_CINV_Guideline.pdf "POGO Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 10, 2015. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 9, 2015. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on October 21, 2016 following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on opioid pain and cough medicines combined with benzodiazepines. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on February 15, 2017 following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on general anesthetic and sedation drugs.

## Copyright Statement



The Guideline for the Prevention and Treatment of Anticipatory Nausea and Vomiting due to Chemotherapy in Pediatric Cancer Patients contains valuable intellectual property, the product of many months of dedicated work. It is not to be reproduced or disseminated without the permission of the authors. Please be advised that copyright is implied.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

