---
title: "Management of postabortion hemorrhage."
id: 10051
permalink: /:collection/10051
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Management of postabortion hemorrhage.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Kerns J, Steinauer J. Management of postabortion hemorrhage. Contraception. 2013 Mar;87(3):331-42. [93 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23218863)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The levels of the recommendations ( **A, B, C** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


####  Conclusions and Recommendations 


The following recommendations are based on good and consistent scientific evidence ( **Level A** ): 


  1. In women with a uterine scar and a placenta previa at 16 or more weeks' gestation, an evaluation for placenta accreta is strongly recommended. If a formal radiologic evaluation cannot be done, a provider experienced in ultrasound should evaluate for placenta accreta. Ultrasound is recommended as a first step in evaluating for placenta accreta. If the diagnosis is uncertain, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be considered. 
  2. Bleeding is likely to be greater with medical abortion than with surgical abortion, although the rates of hemorrhage remain low. Counseling regarding surgical and medical methods can address this increased risk of bleeding. 




The following recommendations are based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence ( **Level B** ): 


  1. Obtaining a preoperative hemoglobin or hematocrit in all women undergoing second-trimester abortion and anemic women undergoing first-trimester medical abortion. 
  2. In training settings, the routine use of intraoperative ultrasound may decrease the risk of incomplete abortion with first-trimester surgical abortion and may decrease the risk of perforation with standard dilation and evacuation (D &E). 
  3. Including vasopressin in a paracervical block may decrease blood loss from abortion. 
  4. Balloon tamponade can be an effective intervention for controlling brisk hemorrhage or hemorrhage refractory to massage and uterotonics and should be considered early in the process of bleeding and hemorrhage. 
  5. Uterine artery embolization (UAE) can effectively control hemorrhage caused by many etiologies. Where available in a timely manner, UAE should be considered before hysterectomy for management of postabortion hemorrhage in patients whose perfusion can be maintained during UAE. 
  6. Uterotonic medications can help control hemorrhage from atony. For actively bleeding patients, methylergonovine maleate, misoprostol and vasopressin are appropriate first-line treatments, with methylergonovine maleate and vasopressin effecting the most rapid response. 
  7. Limited evidence exists for the prophylactic use of methylergonovine maleate prior to first-trimester abortion in reducing the need for re-aspiration. 




The following recommendations are based primarily on consensus or expert opinion ( **Level C** ): 


  1. Fetal demise with fetus retained for 4 or more weeks may be associated with an increased risk of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Obtaining a preoperative coagulation parameter can be considered on an individualized basis, though this has not been studied. 
  2. For women at high risk of hemorrhage, referral to a hospital service or high-acuity center may decrease morbidity. 
  3. Oxytocin can be used as a uterotonic after second-trimester abortion. 




###  Definitions: 


####  Levels of Recommendations 


**Level A** : Recommendations are based on good and consistent scientific evidence. 


**Level B** : Recommendations are based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence. 


**Level C** : Recommendations are based primarily on consensus and expert opinion. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



The original guideline document includes the following algorithms:

  * Algorithm for classifying women as being at low, moderate or high risk for hemorrhage after abortion 
  * Algorithm for a systematic approach to treatment of postabortion hemorrhage 



# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Postabortion hemorrhage 
  * Unwanted pregnancy 



## Guideline Category

- Management
- Prevention
- Risk Assessment
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Obstetrics and Gynecology
- Radiology

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Health Care Providers
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians
- Public Health Departments

## Guideline Objective(s)



To review the medical literature on postabortion hemorrhage

## Target Population



Female patients who are at increased risk of or with confirmed postabortion hemorrhage

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Evaluation for placenta accreta (ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) 
  2. Counseling regarding surgical and medical abortion methods 
  3. Measurement of preoperative hemoglobin or hematocrit 
  4. Intraoperative ultrasound 
  5. Inclusion of vasopressin in a paracervical block 
  6. Balloon tamponade 
  7. Uterine massage 
  8. Uterine artery embolization (UAE) 
  9. Uterotonic medications (e.g., methylergonovine maleate, misoprostol, vasopressin, oxytocin) 
  10. Re-aspiration 
  11. Obtaining a preoperative coagulation parameter 
  12. Referral to hospital or high-acuity center 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Sensitivity and specificity of imaging techniques 
  * Morbidity and mortality related to postabortion hemorrhage 
  * Risk factors for postabortion hemorrhage 
  * Frequency of placenta accreta 
  * Efficacy of treatment 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



The MEDLINE database was used to identify references published between 1955 and December 2011. The database was searched for the following terms: abortion, hemorrhage, abortion complications, bleeding. Abstracts of all languages were included. The abstracts were reviewed and relevant articles obtained. Citations from these journals were reviewed, as well as contemporary textbooks. PubMed and Google Scholar were searched in English for publications regarding abortion and contraception. In addition, reference lists of identified manuscripts were searched for any additional studies that might be relevant. The guideline authors also searched the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>Studies were reviewed and evaluated for quality according to the method outlined by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force:</p>
<p><strong>I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized controlled trial.</p>
<p><strong>II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>
<p><strong>II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case&ndash;control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>
<p><strong>II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments also could be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>
<p><strong>III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Levels of Recommendations**

**Level A** : Recommendations are based on good and consistent scientific evidence.

**Level B** : Recommendations are based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence.

**Level C** : Recommendations are based primarily on consensus and expert opinion.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



These guidelines were reviewed and approved by the Board of the Society of Family Planning.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate management of postabortion hemorrhage

**Groups Most Likely to Benefit**

Prior cesarean sections place women at higher risk of overall complications from second-trimester abortion, with one study demonstrating odds of complications seven times as great among women with two or more cesarean sections as among those with none. The three most common complications included hemorrhage, atony and cervical laceration. Obesity may be a risk factor for increased blood loss with dilation and evacuation (D&E), though no well-designed studies have addressed this question. Women with bleeding disorders secondary to either anticoagulation therapy or bleeding diatheses should be identified through a detailed history. Although limited evidence suggests that significant bleeding with first-trimester abortion among anticoagulated patients is not common, it may theoretically be more common during second-trimester abortion. See Figure 1 in the original guideline for an algorithm for classifying women as being at low, moderate or high risk for hemorrhage after abortion.

## Potential Harms



  * False-positive and false-negative results of imaging 
  * Intensive interventions such as uterine artery embolization (UAE), laparoscopy, laparotomy and hysterectomy may be necessary in the event that primary and secondary treatment measures are unsuccessful in controlling bleeding. In one series, two complications of UAE were noted: one contrast reaction treated with diphenhydramine and one femoral embolus requiring emergent embolectomy. Because UAE is associated with less morbidity and mortality than laparotomy and hysterectomy, the guideline authors recommend attempting UAE prior to more invasive measures in settings where UAE is available. 



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This evidence-based review should guide clinicians, although it is not intended to dictate clinical care.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Clinical Algorithm

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness
- Safety
- Timeliness 

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Kerns J, Steinauer J. Management of postabortion hemorrhage. Contraception. 2013 Mar;87(3):331-42. [93 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23218863)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Mar

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Society of Family Planning - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



The Society of Family Planning receives no direct support from pharmaceutical companies or other industries.

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Jennifer Kerns, MD, MPH, and Jody Steinauer, MD, MAS

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Jennifer Kerns, MD, MPH, and Jody Steinauer, MD, MAS, report no significant relationships with industries relative to these guidelines.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Society of Family Planning Web site](http://www.societyfp.org/_documents/resources/guidelines2013-1.pdf "Society of Family Planning Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



None available

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on January 13, 2014. The information was verified by the guideline developer on February 10, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

