---
title: "Subclinical hypothyroidism in the infertile female population: a guideline."
id: 10912
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Subclinical hypothyroidism in the infertile female population: a guideline.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Subclinical hypothyroidism in the infertile female population: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2015 Sep;104(3):545-53. [62 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26239023)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the level of evidence ( **Level I-III** ) and the strength of the recommendation ( **Grade A-C** ) are given at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Summary 


  * Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level greater than the upper limit of normal range (4.5–5.0 mIU/L) with normal free thyroxine (FT4) levels. 
  * The normal reference range for TSH changes in pregnancy. The upper limit of normal in most laboratories is 4 mIU/L for nonpregnant women and 2.5 mIU/L in the first trimester of pregnancy. 
  * This guideline was conducted because it is controversial whether or not to use first-trimester pregnancy thresholds for upper limit of TSH (i.e.,  >2.5 mIU/L) to diagnose and treat subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) in women with infertility who are attempting pregnancy. 
  * There is insufficient evidence that SCH (defined as TSH >2.5 mIU/L with a normal FT4) is associated with infertility. 
  * There is fair evidence that SCH, defined as TSH levels >4 mIU/L, is associated with miscarriage, but insufficient evidence that TSH levels 2.5–4 mIU/L are associated with miscarriage. 
  * There is fair evidence that treatment of SCH when TSH levels are >4 mIU/L is associated with improved pregnancy rates and decreased miscarriage rates. 
  * There is fair evidence that SCH when TSH levels are >4 mIU/L during pregnancy is associated with adverse developmental outcomes; however, treatment did not improve developmental outcomes in the only randomized trial. 
  * There is fair evidence that thyroid autoimmunity is associated with miscarriage and fair evidence that it is associated with infertility. Levothyroxine treatment may improve pregnancy outcomes in women with positive thyroid antibodies, especially if the TSH level is over 2.5 mIU/L. 
  * There is good evidence against recommending universal screening of thyroid function during pregnancy. 




###  Recommendations 


  * Currently available data support that it is reasonable to test TSH in infertile women attempting pregnancy. If TSH concentrations are over the nonpregnant lab reference range (typically >4 mIU/L), patients should be treated with levothyroxine to maintain levels below 2.5 mIU/L. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * Given the limited data, if TSH levels prior to pregnancy are between 2.5 and 4 mIU/L, management options include either monitoring levels and treating when TSH  >4 mIU/L, or treating with levothyroxine to maintain TSH <2.5 mIU/L. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * During the first trimester of pregnancy it is advisable to treat when the TSH is  >2.5 mIU/L. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * While thyroid antibody testing is not routinely recommended, one might consider testing anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO) antibodies for repeated TSH values  >2.5 mIU/L or when other risk factors for thyroid disease are present. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * If anti-TPO antibodies are detected, TSH levels should be checked and treatment should be considered if the TSH level is over 2.5 mIU/L. ( **Grade B** ) 




###  Definitions 


####  Level of Evidence 


**Level I** : Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial. 


**Level II-1** : Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization. 


**Level II-2** : Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group. 


**Level II-3** : Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence. 


**Level III** : Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees. 


####  Strength of Evidence 


**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None available

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Thyroid dysfunction (subclinical hypothyroidism) 
  * Infertility 



**Note** : The classic definition of subclinical hypothyroidism is a thyrotropin (TSH) level greater than the upper limit of normal range (4.5-5.0 mIU/L) with normal free thyroxine (FT4) levels.

## Guideline Category

- Evaluation
- Screening
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Endocrinology
- Internal Medicine
- Obstetrics and Gynecology

## Intended Users

- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To review the risks and benefits of treating subclinical hypothyroidism in female patients with a history of infertility and miscarriage, as well as obstetrical and neonatal outcomes in this population

## Target Population



Female patients with a history of infertility and miscarriage

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Testing thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (monitoring and maintaining levels, typically between 2.5 and 4 mIU/L) 
  2. Levothyroxine 
  3. Testing anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO) antibodies for repeated TSH values 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Pregnancy 
  * Implantation 
  * Live births 
  * Miscarriage 
  * Infertility 
  * Adverse pregnancy outcomes 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Literature Search**

A systematic literature search was performed using a combination of the following keywords: subclinical hypothyroidism, diagnosis, level, criteria, pregnancy loss, abortion, miscarriage, infertility, pregnancy, baby, fetus, birth defect, delivery, antibody, elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), live-birth rate, preeclampsia, pregnancy rate, complication, death, and demise.

The search was restricted to MEDLINE citations of human subject research published in the English language from 1966 to March 2014. Studies were eligible if they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the effectiveness of a procedure correlated with outcome measure (pregnancy, implantation, or live-birth rates), meta-analyses, and relevant articles from bibliographies of identified articles.

**Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria**

Include relevant articles with:

  * Human subjects 
  * English language 
  * Level 2-3 evidence and above 
  * Systematic reviews 
  * Articles that define subclinical hypothyroidism as TSH <5 mIU/L 



Exclude articles:

  * Off topic 
  * Level 3 evidence (opinion, nonsystematic review, case report, very small case series) 
  * Non-English articles 
  * Without clearly defined subclinical hypothyroidism or a definition of >5 mIU/L 



**Database Searched** \- PubMed

## Number of Source Documents



  * Total selected from all three searches: 134+213+15+47=409 
  * Total raw from all three searches: 829+1340+47=2216 



## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Level of Evidence</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Level I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>
<p><strong>Level III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The quality of the evidence was evaluated using the grading system found in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field and is assigned for each reference in the bibliography (see the original guideline document).

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The literature was reviewed to answer the following questions:

  * How to diagnose subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH)? 
  * Does untreated SCH contribute to miscarriage rates? 
  * Does untreated SCH contribute to infertility? 
  * Does treatment of SCH improve miscarriage rates? 
  * Does treatment of SCH improve live birth rates (LBR) or clinical pregnancy rates (CPR)? 
  * Does untreated SCH affect developmental outcomes? 
  * When to test for antibodies? 



## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



**Strength of Evidence**

**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

## Cost Analysis



While a cost-effectiveness study suggested a cost-risk benefit, subsequent randomized trials found there was no benefit to universal screening for subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) in pregnancy.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This document was reviewed by American Society for Reproductive Medicine members, and their input was considered in the preparation of the final document.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * One observational study showed a nonstatistically significant improvement in miscarriage rates when treatment was initiated with a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of >2.5 mIU/L. 
  * Levothyroxine treatment may improve pregnancy outcomes in women with positive thyroid antibodies, especially if the TSH level is over 2.5 mIU/L. 



## Potential Harms



See the original guideline document for discussion of overall benefit vs risk for specific recommendations.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This report was developed under the direction of the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine as a service to its members and other practicing clinicians. Although this document reflects appropriate management of a problem encountered in the practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations. The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine have approved this report.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Patient Resources
- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Living with Illness
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Subclinical hypothyroidism in the infertile female population: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2015 Sep;104(3):545-53. [62 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26239023)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2015 Sep

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Reproductive Medicine - Nonprofit Organization

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Guideline Committee



Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : Samantha Pfeifer, MD; Samantha Butts, MD, MSCE; Daniel Dumesic, MD; Gregory Fossum, MD; Jeffrey Goldberg, MD; Clarisa Gracia, MD, MSCE; Andrew La Barbera, PhD; Roger Lobo, MD; Randall Odem, MD; Margareta Pisarska, MD; Robert Rebar, MD; Richard Reindollar, MD; Mitchell Rosen, MD; Jay Sandlow, MD; Rebecca Sokol, MD, MPH; Kim Thornton, MD; Michael Vernon, PhD; Eric Widra, MD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



All Committee members disclosed commercial and financial relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee who were found to have conflicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or development of this document.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](http://www.asrm.org/globalassets/asrm/asrm-content/news-and-publications/practice-guidelines/for-non-members/subclinical_hypothyroidism_in_the_infertile_female_population_a_guideline-noprint.pdf "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * Continuing medical education (CME) credit related to this guideline is available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](https://store.asrm.org/Learn/FindACourse.aspx "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



The following is available:

  * Hypothyroidism and pregnancy: what should I know? [internet]. Birmingham (AL): American Society for Reproductive Medicine; 2015. Available from the [ReproductiveFacts.org Web site](http://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-and-publications/patient-fact-sheets-and-booklets/fact-sheets-and-info-booklets/hypothyroidism-and-pregnancy-what-should-i-know/ "ReproductiveFacts.org Web site"). 



Please note: This patient information is intended to provide health professionals with information to share with their patients to help them better understand their health and their diagnosed disorders. By providing access to this patient information, it is not the intention of NGC to provide specific medical advice for particular patients. Rather we urge patients and their representatives to review this material and then to consult with a licensed health professional for evaluation of treatment options suitable for them as well as for diagnosis and answers to their personal medical questions. This patient information has been derived and prepared from a guideline for health care professionals included on NGC by the authors or publishers of that original guideline. The patient information is not reviewed by NGC to establish whether or not it accurately reflects the original guideline's content.

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on April 26, 2016. The information was verified by the guideline developer on June 15, 2016.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

