---
title: "Evidence-based guideline: clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis. Report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology."
id: 8839
permalink: /:collection/8839
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Evidence-based guideline: clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis. Report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Scott TF, Frohman EM, De Seze J, Gronseth GS, Weinshenker BG. Evidence-based guideline: clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis: report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2011 Dec 13;77(24):2128-34. [40 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22156988)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

The American Academy of Neurology reaffirmed the currency of this guideline in November 2016.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions of the levels of the recommendations ( **A, B, C, U** ) and classification of the evidence ( **I-IV** ) are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


In patients with suspected transverse myelitis (TM), distinction between acute complete transverse myelitis (ACTM) or acute partial transverse myelitis (APTM) may be considered useful to determine the etiology of TM and the risk for relapse (more common in APTM) ( **Level C** ). 


Age and gender may be considered useful to determine etiology in a patient presenting with TM syndrome, with spinal infarcts seen more often in older patients and more female than male patients having TM due to multiple sclerosis (MS) ( **Level C** ). Due to considerable overlap between groups, patient demographic characteristics are not definitive in establishing the cause of myelopathy. 


There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the usefulness of ethnicity to determine the cause of a subacute myelopathy ( **Level U** ). 


Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) characteristics consistent with those of MS may be considered useful to predict conversion to MS after a first episode of partial TM ( **Level C** ). 


Longer spinal lesions extending over more than 3 vertebral segments may be considered useful in determining neuromyelitis optica (NMO) vs MS ( **Level C** ). 


NMO-immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies should be considered useful to determine the cause of TM in patients presenting with clinical features of ACTM ( **Level B** ). 


Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination for cells and oligoclonal bands (OCBs) may be considered useful to determine the cause of the TM syndrome ( **Level C** ). 


The presence of NMO-IgG antibodies (aquaporin-4–specific antibodies) should be considered useful in determining an increased risk of TM recurrence ( **Level B** ). 


Plasma exchange may be considered in patients with TM who fail to improve after corticosteroid treatment ( **Level C** ). Rituximab may be considered in patients with TM due to NMO to decrease the number of relapses ( **Level C** ). There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the efficacy of other therapies ( **Level U** ). 


###  Definitions: 


####  Classification of Recommendations 


The strength of practice recommendations is linked directly to the level of evidence: 


**Level A** = Established as effective, ineffective or harmful (or established as useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level A rating requires at least two consistent Class I studies.)* 


**Level B** = Probably effective, ineffective or harmful (or probably useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level B rating requires at least one Class I study or two consistent Class II studies.) 


**Level C** = Possibly effective, ineffective or harmful (or possibly useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level C rating requires at least one Class II study or two consistent Class III studies.) 


**Level U** = Data inadequate or conflicting; given current knowledge, treatment (test, predictor) is unproven. 


*In exceptional cases, one convincing Class I study may suffice for an "A" recommendation if 1) all criteria are met, 2) the magnitude of effect is large (relative rate improved outcome  >5 and the lower limit of the confidence interval is >2). 


####  Classification of Evidence for Therapeutic Interventions 


**Class I** : A randomized, controlled clinical trial of the intervention of interest with masked or objective outcome assessment, in a representative population. Relevant baseline characteristics are presented and substantially equivalent among treatment groups or there is appropriate statistical adjustment for differences. 


The following are also required: 


  1. Concealed allocation 
  2. Primary outcome(s) clearly defined 
  3. Exclusion/inclusion criteria clearly defined 
  4. Adequate accounting for dropouts (with at least 80% of enrolled subjects completing the study) and crossovers with numbers sufficiently low to have minimal potential for bias. 
  5. For noninferiority or equivalence trials claiming to prove efficacy for one or both drugs, the following are also required*: 
    1. The authors explicitly state the clinically meaningful difference to be excluded by defining the threshold for equivalence or non-inferiority. 
    2. The standard treatment used in the study is substantially similar to that used in previous studies establishing efficacy of the standard treatment (e.g., for a drug, the mode of administration, dose and dosage adjustments are similar to those previously shown to be effective). 
    3. The inclusion and exclusion criteria for patient selection and the outcomes of patients on the standard treatment are comparable to those of previous studies establishing efficacy of the standard treatment. 
    4. The interpretation of the results of the study is based upon a per protocol analysis that takes into account dropouts or crossovers. 




**Class II** : A randomized controlled clinical trial of the intervention of interest in a representative population with masked or objective outcome assessment that lacks one criteria a–e above or a prospective matched cohort study with masked or objective outcome assessment in a representative population that meets b–e above. Relevant baseline characteristics are presented and substantially equivalent among treatment groups or there is appropriate statistical adjustment for differences. 


**Class III** : All other controlled trials (including well-defined natural history controls or patients serving as own controls) in a representative population, where outcome is independently assessed, or independently derived by objective outcome measurement.** 


**Class IV** : Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus or expert opinion. 


*Note that numbers 1–3 in Class Ie are required for Class II in equivalence trials. If any one of the three is missing, the class is automatically downgraded to Class III.   
**Objective outcome measurement: an outcome measure that is unlikely to be affected by an observer's (patient, treating physician, investigator) expectation or bias (e.g., blood tests, administrative outcome data). 


####  Classification of Evidence for Diagnostic Tests 


**Class I** : A cohort study with prospective data collection of a broad spectrum of persons with the suspected condition, using an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The diagnostic test is objective or performed and interpreted without knowledge of the patient's clinical status. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy. 


**Class II** : A case control study of a broad spectrum of persons with the condition established by an acceptable reference standard compared to a broad spectrum of controls or a cohort study where a broad spectrum of persons with the suspected condition where the data was collected retrospectively. The diagnostic test is objective or performed and interpreted without knowledge of disease status. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy. 


**Class III** : A case control study or cohort study where either persons with the condition or controls are of a narrow spectrum. The condition is established by an acceptable reference standard. The reference standard and diagnostic test are objective or performed and interpreted by different observers. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy. 


**Class IV** : Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus, expert opinion or a case report. 


####  Classification of Evidence for Prognostic Articles 


**Class I** : A cohort study of a broad spectrum of persons at risk for developing the outcome (e.g., target disease, work status). The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who is masked to the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of prognostic accuracy. 


**Class II** : A case control study of a broad spectrum of persons with the condition compared to a broad spectrum of controls or a cohort study of a broad spectrum of persons at risk for the outcome (e.g., target disease, work status) where the data was collected retrospectively. The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who is masked to the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of prognostic accuracy. 


**Class III** : A case control study or a cohort study where either the persons with the condition or the controls are of a narrow spectrum where the data was collected retrospectively. The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who did not determine the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of a prognostic accuracy. 


**Class IV** : Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus, expert opinion or a case report. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None available

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Transverse myelitis (TM)

## Guideline Category

- Assessment of Therapeutic Effectiveness
- Diagnosis
- Evaluation
- Management
- Risk Assessment
- Technology Assessment
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Neurology
- Pathology
- Radiology

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To assess the evidence for diagnostic tests and therapies for transverse myelitis (TM) and make evidence-based recommendations

## Target Population



Patients with transverse myelitis (TM)

## Interventions and Practices Considered



 **Diagnosis/Evaluation/Risk Assessment**

  1. Evaluation of demographic features (age, gender, ethnicity) 
  2. Evaluation of clinical features (e.g., distinction between acute complete transverse myelitis [ACTM] or acute partial TM [APTM]) 
  3. Brain and spinal magnetic resonance imaging 
  4. Laboratory evaluations: cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leukocyte count, analysis of serum neuromyelitis optica immunoglobulin G (NMO-IgG) antibodies, CSF analysis for oligoclonal bands, presence of CSF pleocytosis 



**Management/Treatment**

  1. Plasma exchange 
  2. Rituximab 
  3. High-dose intravenous methylprednisolone, mitoxantrone, and other immunosuppressive therapies (note: these therapies were considered, but there was insufficient evidence regarding efficacy to recommend them) 



## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic tests 
  * Efficacy of therapy in alleviating transverse myelitis (TM) attacks 
  * Effectiveness of therapy in preventing future TM attacks 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**2011 Guideline**

The guideline sought to answer the following questions regarding patients with myelopathy: which demographic, clinical, radiographic, and laboratory features are useful:

  1. To distinguish transverse myelitis (TM) from other causes of acute and subacute noncompressive myelopathy? 
  2. To determine the cause of the myelitis? 
  3. To identify patients at increased risk for recurrence? 



For patients with TM, which therapies 

  4. Alleviate acute attacks? 
  5. Prevent future attacks? 



A literature search of Medline was performed for relevant articles published from 1966 to March 2009, using the following key words: myelitis, transverse myelitis, Devic disease, neuromyelitis optica, diagnosis, prognosis, outcomes, MRI, and treatments. The search was limited to reports in humans and abstracts available in English. Subheadings were applied as appropriate. The exact search strategy employed is described in Appendix e-1 of the Data Supplement in the original guideline document. A secondary search of review articles was done to find any missed citations.

The guideline developers reviewed all abstracts; the full text of potentially relevant articles was subsequently reviewed by at least 2 committee members. The guideline developers excluded review articles and case reports.

**2016 Reaffirmation**

The guideline developer searched Medline for studies published between January 2013 to January 2015, using the following search strategy: myelitis, transverse myelitis, Devic disease, neuromyelitis optica, diagnosis, prognosis, outcomes, MRI, and treatments. Inclusion criteria were humans only, relevant to clinical questions; exclusion criteria used to screen search results were the same as described in the 2011 published guideline.

## Number of Source Documents



The literature search yielded 136 articles. All articles were reviewed in their entirety. Sixty-five articles met inclusion criteria.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Classification of Evidence for Therapeutic Interventions</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Class I</strong>: A randomized, controlled clinical trial of the intervention of interest with masked or objective outcome assessment, in a representative population. Relevant baseline characteristics are presented and substantially equivalent among treatment groups or there is appropriate statistical adjustment for differences.</p>
<p>The following are also required:</p>
<ol style="list-style-type: lower-alpha;">
    <li>Concealed allocation </li>
    <li>Primary outcome(s) clearly defined </li>
    <li>Exclusion/inclusion criteria clearly defined </li>
    <li>Adequate accounting for dropouts (with at least 80% of enrolled subjects completing the study) and crossovers with numbers sufficiently low to have minimal potential for bias. </li>
    <li>For noninferiority or equivalence trials claiming to prove efficacy for one or both drugs, the following are also required*:
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal;">
        <li>The authors explicitly state the clinically meaningful difference to be excluded by defining the threshold for equivalence or non-inferiority. </li>
        <li>The standard treatment used in the study is substantially similar to that used in previous studies establishing efficacy of the standard treatment (e.g., for a drug, the mode of administration, dose and dosage adjustments are similar to those previously shown to be effective). </li>
        <li>The inclusion and exclusion criteria for patient selection and the outcomes of patients on the standard treatment are comparable to those of previous studies establishing efficacy of the standard treatment. </li>
        <li>The interpretation of the results of the study is based upon a per protocol analysis that takes into account dropouts or crossovers. </li>
    </ol>
    </li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Class II</strong>: A randomized controlled clinical trial of the intervention of interest in a representative population with masked or objective outcome assessment that lacks one criteria a&ndash;e above or a prospective matched cohort study with masked or objective outcome assessment in a representative population that meets b&ndash;e above. Relevant baseline characteristics are presented and substantially equivalent among treatment groups or there is appropriate statistical adjustment for differences.</p>
<p><strong>Class III</strong>: All other controlled trials (including well-defined natural history controls or patients serving as own controls) in a representative population, where outcome is independently assessed, or independently derived by objective outcome measurement.**</p>
<p><strong>Class IV</strong>: Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus or expert opinion.</p>
<p class="Note">*Note that numbers 1&ndash;3 in Class Ie are required for Class II in equivalence trials. If any one of the three is missing, the class is automatically downgraded to Class III.<br />
**Objective outcome measurement: an outcome measure that is unlikely to be affected by an observer's (patient, treating physician, investigator) expectation or bias (e.g., blood tests, administrative outcome data).</p>
<p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Classification of Evidence for Diagnostic Tests</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Class I</strong>: A cohort study with prospective data collection of a broad spectrum of persons with the suspected condition, using an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The diagnostic test is objective or performed and interpreted without knowledge of the patient's clinical status. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class II</strong>: A case control study of a broad spectrum of persons with the condition established by an acceptable reference standard compared to a broad spectrum of controls or a cohort study where a broad spectrum of persons with the suspected condition where the data was collected retrospectively. The diagnostic test is objective or performed and interpreted without knowledge of disease status. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class III</strong>: A case control study or cohort study where either persons with the condition or controls are of a narrow spectrum. The condition is established by an acceptable reference standard. The reference standard and diagnostic test are objective or performed and interpreted by different observers. Study results allow calculation of measures of diagnostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class IV</strong>: Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus, expert opinion or a case report.</p>
<p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Classification of Evidence for Prognostic Articles</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Class I</strong>: A cohort study of a broad spectrum of persons at risk for developing the outcome (e.g., target disease, work status). The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who is masked to the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of prognostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class II</strong>: A case control study of a broad spectrum of persons with the condition compared to a broad spectrum of controls or a cohort study of a broad spectrum of persons at risk for the outcome (e.g., target disease, work status) where the data was collected retrospectively. The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who is masked to the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of prognostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class III</strong>: A case control study or a cohort study where either the persons with the condition or the controls are of a narrow spectrum where the data was collected retrospectively. The outcome is defined by an acceptable reference standard for case definition. The outcome is objective or measured by an observer who did not determine the presence of the risk factor. Study results allow calculation of measures of a prognostic accuracy.</p>
<p><strong>Class IV</strong>: Studies not meeting Class I, II or III criteria including consensus, expert opinion or a case report.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



At least 2 committee members independently rated each article for its class of evidence using the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) diagnostic (questions 1 and 2), prognostic (question 3), or therapeutic (questions 4 and 5) classification of evidence schemes (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field). Differences between reviewers were resolved through discussion with a third reviewer.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **2011 Guideline**

Recommendations were formulated and linked to the strength of the evidence using the scheme described in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field.

**2016 Reaffirmation**

A Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation (GDDI) Subcommittee member who had expertise in transverse myelitis conducted a targeted literature search for high quality studies using the same criteria as presented in the original guideline. The GDDI reviewer and the subcommittee reviewed the new evidence and determined that the following three criteria were met: 1. There is no new evidence that would alter conclusions or recommendations in the guideline since the last literature search, 2. Guideline methodology is sound and current methodology is not substantially different, and 3. No significant practice variation relevant to the guideline currently exists.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Classification of Recommendations**

The strength of practice recommendations is linked directly to the level of evidence:

**Level A** = Established as effective, ineffective or harmful (or established as useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level A rating requires at least two consistent Class I studies.)*

**Level B** = Probably effective, ineffective or harmful (or probably useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level B rating requires at least one Class I study or two consistent Class II studies.)

**Level C** = Possibly effective, ineffective or harmful (or possibly useful/predictive or not useful/predictive) for the given condition in the specified population. (Level C rating requires at least one Class II study or two consistent Class III studies.)

**Level U** = Data inadequate or conflicting; given current knowledge, treatment (test, predictor) is unproven.

*In exceptional cases, one convincing Class I study may suffice for an "A" recommendation if 1) all criteria are met, 2) the magnitude of effect is large (relative rate improved outcome >5 and the lower limit of the confidence interval is >2).

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Drafts of the guideline have been reviewed by at least three American Academy of Neurology (AAN) committees, a network of neurologists, _Neurology_ peer reviewers, and representatives from related fields.

This guideline was approved by the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee on November 13, 2010; by the Practice Committee on May 11, 2011; and by the AAN Board of Directors on October 14, 2011.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Increased accuracy of diagnostic tests and improved therapies for people with transverse myelitis (TM)

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This statement is provided as an educational service of the American Academy of Neurology (AAN). It is based on an assessment of current scientific and clinical information. It is not intended to include all possible proper methods of care for a particular neurologic problem or all legitimate criteria for choosing to use a specific procedure. Neither is it intended to exclude any reasonable alternative methodologies. The AAN recognizes that specific patient care decisions are the prerogative of the patient and the physician caring for the patient, based on all of the circumstances involved. The clinical context section is made available in order to place the evidence-based guideline(s) into perspective with current practice habits and challenges. No formal practice recommendations should be inferred.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Patient Resources
- Quick Reference Guides/Physician Guides
- Resources
- Slide Presentation
- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Scott TF, Frohman EM, De Seze J, Gronseth GS, Weinshenker BG. Evidence-based guideline: clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis: report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2011 Dec 13;77(24):2128-34. [40 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22156988)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2011 Dec 13 (reaffirmed 2016 Nov 22)

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Academy of Neurology - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



American Academy of Neurology

## Guideline Committee



Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Guideline Authors_ : T.F. Scott, MD; E.M. Frohman, MD, PhD; J. De Seze, MD; G.S. Gronseth, MD, FAAN; B.G. Weinshenker, MD

_Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee Members 2009 –2011_: Janis M. Miyasaki, MD, MEd, FAAN ( _Co-Chair_ ); Cynthia L. Harden, MD ( _Co-Chair_ ); Richard M. Camicioli, MD; Terry D. Fife, MD, FAAN; Jonathan Hosey, MD, FAAN (Ex-Officio); Cheryl Jaigobin, MD; Barbara S. Koppel, MD, FAAN; Jason Lazarou, MD; Alexander Rae-Grant, MD; William H. Theodore, MD, FAAN

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) is committed to producing independent, critical, and truthful clinical practice guidelines (CPGs). Significant efforts are made to minimize the potential for conflicts of interest to influence the recommendations of this CPG. To the extent possible, the AAN keeps separate those who have a financial stake in the success or failure of the products appraised in the CPGs and the developers of the guidelines. Conflict of interest forms were obtained from all authors and reviewed by an oversight committee prior to project initiation. AAN limits the participation of authors with substantial conflicts of interest. The AAN forbids commercial participation in, or funding of, guideline projects. Drafts of the guideline have been reviewed by at least three AAN committees, a network of neurologists, _Neurology_ peer reviewers, and representatives from related fields. The AAN Guideline Author Conflict of Interest Policy can be viewed at [www.aan.com](http://www.aan.com "AAN Web site").

Dr. Scott has received funding for travel or speaker honoraria from, served on the speakers' bureaus and scientific advisory boards of, and performed consultation work for Acorda Therapeutics Inc., Avanir Pharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.; served as an associate editor for _BMC Neurology_ ; and has received research support from Biogen Idec, National Multiple Sclerosis Society, Novartis, Pittsburgh Foundation, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. Dr. Frohman has received funding for travel and/or speaker honoraria from Biogen Idec, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., Genzyme Corporation, Abbott, Acorda Therapeutics Inc., and Bayer Schering Pharma; has served on speakers' bureaus for Biogen Idec, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., Bayer Schering Pharma, and Athena Diagnostics; and has served as a consultant for Biogen Idec, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., Athena Diagnostics, Inc., Acorda Therapeutics Inc., and Abbott. Dr. de Seze serves on scientific advisory boards for and has received honoraria from Biogen Idec, LFB, Merck Serono, sanofi-aventis, and Bayer Schering Pharma; and serves on the editorial board of _Revue Neurologique_. Dr. Gronseth serves as an editorial advisory board member of Neurology Now, serves on a speakers' bureau for Boehringer Ingelheim, and receives honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim and the American Academy of Neurology. Dr. Weinshenker serves on data safety monitoring boards for Novartis and Biogen Idec; serves on the editorial boards of the _Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences_ , the _Turkish Journal of Neurology_ , and _Multiple Sclerosis_ ; has received research support from Genzyme Corporation and the Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation; and receives license royalties from RSR Ltd. for a patent re: Aquaporin-4 associated antibodies for diagnosis of neuromyelitis optica.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

The American Academy of Neurology reaffirmed the currency of this guideline in November 2016.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: A list of American Academy of Neurology (AAN) guidelines, along with a link to a Portable Document Format (PDF) file for this guideline, is available at the [AAN Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/ "AAN Web site").

Print copies: Available from the AAN Member Services Center, (800) 879-1960, or from AAN, 1080 Montreal Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55116.

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis. AAN summary of evidence-based guideline for clinicians. St. Paul (MN): American Academy of Neurology. 2011. 2 p. Available in Portable Document Format (PDF) from the [American Academy of Neurology (AAN) Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/GetGuidelineContent/502 "AAN Web site"). 
  * Clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis. Case presentation. St. Paul (MN): American Academy of Neurology. 2011. 5 p. Available in PDF from the [AAN Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/GetGuidelineContent/501 "AAN Web site"). 
  * Clinical evaluation and treatment of transverse myelitis. Slide presentation. St. Paul (MN): American Academy of Neurology. 2011. 56 p. Available from the [AAN Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/GetGuidelineContent/504 "AAN Web site"). 
  * AAN guideline development process [online]. St. Paul (MN): American Academy of Neurology. Available from the [AAN Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/Development "AAN Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



The following is available:

  * Evaluating and treating transverse myelitis. AAN summary of evidence-based guideline for patients and their families. St. Paul (MN): American Academy of Neurology. 2011. 2 p. Available in Portable Document Format (PDF) from the [American Academy of Neurology (AAN) Web site](http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/Home/GetGuidelineContent/503 "AAN Web site"). 



Please note: This patient information is intended to provide health professionals with information to share with their patients to help them better understand their health and their diagnosed disorders. By providing access to this patient information, it is not the intention of NGC to provide specific medical advice for particular patients. Rather we urge patients and their representatives to review this material and then to consult with a licensed health professional for evaluation of treatment options suitable for them as well as for diagnosis and answers to their personal medical questions. This patient information has been derived and prepared from a guideline for health care professionals included on NGC by the authors or publishers of that original guideline. The patient information is not reviewed by NGC to establish whether or not it accurately reflects the original guideline's content.

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on April 12, 2012. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on November 21, 2013 following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on Arzerra (ofatumumab) and Rituxan (rituximab). The currency of the guideline was reaffirmed by the developer in November 2016 and this summary was updated by ECRI Institute on January 30, 2017.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is copyrighted by the American Academy of Neurology.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

