---
title: "A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of hospitalized adult patients with obesity."
id: 10077
---

# General

## Guideline Title

A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of hospitalized adult patients with obesity.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Choban P, Dickerson R, Malone A, Worthington P, Compher C, American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of hospitalized adult patients with obesity. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013 Nov;37(6):714-44. [97 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23976769)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the strength of recommendations ( **Strong** , **Weak** , **Further research needed** ) and quality of evidence ( **High** , **Moderate** , **Low** , **Very Low** ) are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


####  Do Clinical Outcomes Vary Across Levels of Obesity in Critically Ill or Hospitalized Non-Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Patients? 


Critically ill patients with obesity experience more complications than patients with optimal body mass index (BMI) levels. Nutrition assessment and development of a nutrition support plan is recommended within 48 hours of ICU admission ( **Strong** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: Low 


All hospitalized patients, regardless of BMI, should be screened for nutrition risk within 48 hours of admission, with nutrition assessment for patients who are considered at risk ( **Strong** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: Low 


####  How Should Energy Requirements Be Determined in Obese Critically Ill or Hospitalized Non-ICU Patients? 


In the critically ill obese patient, if indirect calorimetry is unavailable, energy requirements should be based on the Penn State University 2010 predictive equation or the modified Penn State University equation if the patient is over the age of 60 years ( **Strong** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: High 


In the hospitalized obese patient, if indirect calorimetry is unavailable and the Penn State University equations cannot be used, energy requirements may be based on the Mifflin–St Jeor equation using actual body weight ( **Weak** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: Moderate 


####  Are Clinical Outcomes Improved With Hypocaloric, High Protein Diets in Hospitalized Patients With Obesity? 


Clinical outcomes are at least equivalent in patients supported with high protein hypocaloric feeding to those supported with high protein eucaloric feeding. A trial of hypocaloric high protein feeding is suggested in patients who do not have severe renal or hepatic dysfunction ( **Weak** ). Hypocaloric feeding may be started with 50% to 70% of estimated energy requirements or  <14 kcal/kg actual weight. High protein feeding may be started with 1.2 g/kg actual weight or 2 to 2.5 g/kg ideal body weight, with adjustment of goal protein intake by the results of nitrogen balance studies. 


#####  Evidence Grade: Low 


Hypocaloric low protein feedings are associated with unfavorable outcomes. Clinical vigilance for adequate protein provision is suggested in patients who do not have severe renal or hepatic dysfunction ( **Weak** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: Low 


####  In Obese Patients Who Have Had Malabsorptive or Restrictive Surgical Procedures for Weight Loss, What Micronutrients Should Be Evaluated? 


Patients who have undergone sleeve gastrectomy, gastric bypass, or biliopancreatic diversion ± duodenal switch have increased risk of nutrient deficiency. In acutely ill hospitalized patients with history of these procedures, evaluation for evidence of depletion of iron, copper, zinc, selenium, thiamine, folate, and vitamins B  12  , and D is suggested as well as repletion of deficiency states. ( **Weak** ). 


#####  Evidence Grade: Low 


###  Definitions: 


**Note** : The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) clinical guidelines have adopted concepts of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. A full description of the methodology is outlined in the A.S.P.E.N. guideline "Clinical guidelines for the use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adult and pediatric patients: applying the GRADE system to development of A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines" (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field). 


####  Quality of Evidence 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    High
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Moderate
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Low
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Very Low
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  Strength of Recommendation 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Strength of Recommendation">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Strong
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Net benefits outweigh harms
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Weak
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Tradeoffs for patient are important
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Further Research Needed
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Uncertain tradeoffs
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Obesity 
  * Critical illnesses and other conditions requiring nutritional support 



## Guideline Category

- Evaluation
- Risk Assessment
- Screening
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Critical Care
- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Nursing
- Nutrition

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Allied Health Personnel
- Dietitians
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To guide clinicians on the nutrition support care of hospitalized adult patients who have obesity

## Target Population



Critically Ill or hospitalized non-intensive care unit (ICU) adult patients who have obesity

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Nutrition assessment and development of a nutrition support plan within 48 hours of intensive care unit (ICU) admission 
  2. Determining energy requirements: 
    * Use of indirect calorimetry 
    * Use of Penn State University 2010 predictive equations or the modified Penn State equation 
    * Use of the Mifflin–St Jeor equation using actual body weight 
  3. High protein hypocaloric feeding 
  4. Evaluation for evidence of depletion of iron, copper, zinc, selenium, thiamine, folate, and vitamins B12, and D as well as repletion of deficiency states in patients who have undergone sleeve gastrectomy, gastric bypass, or biliopancreatic diversion ± duodenal switch 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Morbidity and mortality 
  * Intensive care unit (ICU)/hospital length of stay 
  * Ventilator days 
  * Infection 
  * Other surgical complications 
  * Accuracy of energy requirement assessments 
  * Effectiveness of high protein diets 
  * Clinical value of micronutrient evaluations pre- and post-operatively 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



The questions addressed in the guideline are summarized in Table 1 of the original guideline document. With the assistance of a reference librarian a search was conducted in PubMed, EMBASE, and CINAHL on August 1, 2012, and updated May 2, 2013, using inclusion criteria of adult subjects, English language, randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and publications over the past 10 years. Search terms "obesity," "clinical outcomes," "mortality," "infection," "parenteral nutrition," and "enteral nutrition" were applied in various combinations for Questions 1 to 3. For Question 1, 31 articles met the inclusion criteria. For Question 2, 9 articles that described measures in hospitalized or clinical populations of obese patients and that reported data with accuracy and bias rates were included. For Question 3, the time limitation was relaxed to obtain all published information on the topic, yielding 8 articles. For Question 4, search terms of "copper," "zinc," "iron," "selenium," "vitamin deficiency," "nutrient deficiency," "gastric bypass," "biliopancreatic diversion," "vitamin D," and "bariatric surgery" were used in various combinations with a time limitation of the past 10 years, which yielded 22 articles.

## Number of Source Documents



  * **Question 1** : 31 articles 
  * **Question 2** : 9 articles 
  * **Question 3** : 8 articles 
  * **Question 4** : 22 articles 



## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Note</strong>: The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) clinical guidelines have adopted concepts of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. A full description of the methodology is outlined in the A.S.P.E.N. guideline "Clinical guidelines for the use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adult and pediatric patients: applying the GRADE system to development of A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines" (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).</p>
<p><strong>Quality of Evidence</strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top">High</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top">Moderate</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top">Low</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top">Very Low</th>
            <td valign="top">Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



A systematic review of the best available evidence to answer a series of questions regarding management of nutrition support in patients with obesity was undertaken and evaluated using concepts adopted from the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



These Clinical Guidelines were developed under the guidance of the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors.

A.S.P.E.N. Clinical Guidelines has adopted concepts of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. In a consensus process, the authors make recommendations for clinical practice that are based on the evidence review assessed against consideration of the risks and benefits to patients. Recommendations are graded as strong when the evidence is strong and/or the risk vs benefit analysis is strong. Weak recommendations may be based on weaker evidence and/or weaker trade-offs to the patient. When limited research is available to answer a question, the recommendation is for further research to be conducted.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Note** : The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) clinical guidelines have adopted concepts of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. A full description of the methodology is outlined in the A.S.P.E.N. guideline "Clinical guidelines for the use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adult and pediatric patients: applying the GRADE system to development of A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines" (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

**Strength of Recommendation**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Strong
</th>  
<td>

Net benefits outweigh harms
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

Weak
</th>  
<td>

Tradeoffs for patient are important
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

Further Research Needed
</th>  
<td>

Uncertain tradeoffs
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



A consensus process, that includes consideration of the strength of the evidence together with the risks and benefits to the patient, was used to develop the clinical guideline recommendations prior to multiple levels of external and internal review and approval by the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors on June 26, 2013.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

The recommendations were based primarily on a comprehensive review of published reports that included randomized clinical trials and controlled and uncontrolled case series. In cases where the data did not appear conclusive, recommendations were based on the consensus opinion of the group in a process that considered the risk versus benefit to the patient.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Appropriate nutrition support in adult hospitalized patients with obesity, which may lead to more favorable outcomes 
  * Avoidance of complications from overfeeding 



## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) clinical guidelines are based on general conclusions of health professionals who, in developing such guidelines, have balanced potential benefits to be derived from a particular mode of medical therapy against certain risks inherent with such therapy. However, the professional judgment of the attending health professional is the primary component of quality medical care. Because guidelines cannot account for every variation in circumstances, the practitioner must always exercise professional judgment in their application. These clinical guidelines are intended to supplement, but not replace, professional training and judgment.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Resources

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Choban P, Dickerson R, Malone A, Worthington P, Compher C, American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of hospitalized adult patients with obesity. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013 Nov;37(6):714-44. [97 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23976769)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Nov

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.)

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Patricia Choban, MD; Roland Dickerson, PharmD, BCNSP; Ainsley Malone, MS, RD, CNSC; Patricia Worthington, MSN, RN; Charlene Compher, PhD, RD, CNSC, LDN, FADA, FASPEN; American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



There were no conflicts of interest relative to this guideline.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site](http://pen.sagepub.com/content/37/6/714.full "Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Schiavone PA, Piccolo K, Compher C. Application of the A.S.P.E.N. Clinical Guideline for Nutrition Support of Hospitalized Adult Patients with Obesity: a case study of home parenteral nutrition. Nutr Clin Pract. 2013 Dec 19. [Epub ahead of print]. Electronic copies: Available to subscribers from the [Nutrition in Clinical Practice Web site](http://intl-ncp.sagepub.com/content/early/2013/12/18/0884533613510183.abstract "Nutrition in Clinical Practice Web site"). 
  * Clinical guidelines for the use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adult and pediatric patients: applying the GRADE system to development of A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines. American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.); 2012 Jan. 5 p. Electronic copies: Available from the [Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site](http://pen.sagepub.com/content/36/1/77.full "Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on December 20, 2013. The information was verified by the guideline developer on January 6, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

