---
title: "Guideline for safe use of energy-generating devices."
id: 11130
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Guideline for safe use of energy-generating devices.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Burlingame BL, Conner RL. Guideline for safe use of energy-generating devices. In: 2016 Guidelines for Perioperative Practice. Denver (CO): Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN); 2016 Sep. p. e49-e76. [183 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



**Note from the Association of perioperative Registered Nurses (AORN)** : The original guideline document provides guidance to the perioperative team for the safe use and maintenance of energy-generating devices. The types of energy addressed in this document include electricity delivered as radio-frequency waves, ultrasound, and laser. The devices that generate the energy include electrosurgical units (ESUs), electrocauteries, ultrasonic instruments, and lasers. The energy produced is transferred to the patient by various methods, including monopolar, bipolar, advanced bipolar (e.g., vessel-sealing), and tripolar (e.g., plasma knife) devices; class 3 and class 4 lasers; and ultrasound (e.g., ultrasonic tissue ablation system, phacoemulsification) and argon-enhanced coagulation (AEC) modalities. 


  1. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk for injury to patients and personnel during the use of energy-generating devices. 
  2. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk for injury associated with the use of electrosurgical units and electrosurgical accessories. 
  3. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk for injury associated with the use of electrosurgery during minimally invasive surgery. 
  4. A laser safety program should be established for all owned, leased, or borrowed laser equipment in any location where lasers are used (ECRI, 2011; "Z136.3: Safe use of lasers in health care," 2011; "Z136.1: Safe use of lasers," 2014). 
  5. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk for injury associated with the use of a laser (Dhepe, 2009; Hospital eTools, 2016). 
  6. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk for injury associated with the use of a phacoemulsifier. 
  7. Precautions should be taken to mitigate the risk of injury associated with the use of AEC. 


## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Any condition requiring surgical or other invasive procedures with use of energy-generating devices

## Guideline Category

- Prevention
- Risk Assessment

## Clinical Specialty

- Nursing
- Surgery

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Hospitals
- Nurses

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To provide guidance to the perioperative team for the safe use and maintenance of energy-generating devices 
  * To provide guidance for some elements of surgical fires and electrical safety related to energy-generating devices 



## Target Population



Patients undergoing surgical and other invasive procedures that require use of energy-generating devices

## Interventions and Practices Considered



Safe use and maintenance of energy-generating devices used in the perioperative environment including electrosurgical units (ESUs), electrocauteries, ultrasonic instruments, and lasers

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Incidence of patient injury when using devices that generate the energy, such as electrosurgical units (ESUs), electrocauteries, ultrasonic instruments, and lasers 
  * Risk of injury to health care personnel 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Evidence Review**

A medical librarian conducted a systematic search of the databases MEDLINE®, CINAHL®, and Scopus® and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews in October 2015. Results were limited to literature published in English from January 2009 through October 2015. The medical librarian also established alerts at the time of the initial search. During the development of the guideline, the lead author requested supplementary searches and additional articles that either did not fit the original search criteria or were discovered during the evidence appraisal process. The results of alerts were considered until February 2016.

The search terms included subject headings and keywords that address precautions and injuries related to the use of electrosurgical and laser devices. Terms for procedures included _electrosurgery, ultrasonic therapy, ultrasonic surgical procedures, diathermy, argon plasma coagulation, electrocoagulation, high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation, endometrial ablation techniques, and laser therapy_. Subject headings and keywords related to precautions included _adverse effects, accident prevention, patient safety, equipment contamination, equipment safety, equipment failure,_ and _risk management_. Special attention was paid to terms that would retrieve literature addressing the potential causes and effects of equipment failure and injuries. Such terms included _burns, fires, implantable electronic devices_ (e.g., _artificial pacemaker, implanted electrodes, electromagnetic fields_ ), and _power sources and settings_ (e.g., _electric power supplies, grounding, capacitive coupling, electric wiring_ ). Subject headings and keywords for types of personal protective equipment and occupational hazards also were included.

Excluded were non-peer-reviewed publications, evidence from other disciplines when evidence from the perioperative setting was available, and case reports that did not provide recommendations for preventing injuries related to the use of electrosurgical devices. Editorials, news items, and other brief items were excluded. Lower-level or lower-quality evidence was excluded when higher-level or higher-quality evidence was available.

## Number of Source Documents



In total, 725 research and non-research sources of evidence were identified for possible inclusion, and of these, 183 were cited in the original guideline document. See Figure 1 in the original guideline document for a flow diagram of literature search results.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>I</strong>: Randomized controlled trial (RCT) or experimental study, systematic review of all RCTs</p>
<p><strong>II</strong>: Quasi-experimental study, systematic review of quasi-experimental studies or combination of quasi-experimental and RCTs</p>
<p><strong>III</strong>: Non-experimental studies, qualitative studies, systematic review of non-experimental studies, combination of non-experimental, quasi-experimental, and RCTs, or any or all studies are qualitative</p>
<p><strong>IV</strong>: Clinical practice guidelines, position or consensus statements</p>
<p><strong>V</strong>: Literature review, expert opinion, case report, community standard, clinician experience, consumer experience, organizational experience (quality improvement, financial)</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Articles identified by the search were provided to the project team for evaluation. The team consisted of the lead author and three evidence appraisers. The lead author divided the search results into topics and assigned members of the team to review and critically appraise each article using the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) Research or Non-Research Evidence Appraisal Tools as appropriate. The literature was independently evaluated and appraised according to the strength and quality of the evidence. Each article was then assigned an appraisal score. The appraisal score is noted in brackets after each reference in the original guideline document, as applicable.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The collective evidence supporting each intervention within a specific recommendation was summarized and the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) Evidence Rating Model (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field) was used to rate the strength of the evidence. Factors considered in the review of the collective evidence were the quality of the evidence, the quantity of similar evidence on a given topic, and the consistency of evidence supporting a recommendation. The evidence rating is noted in brackets after each intervention in the original guideline document.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **1: Strong Evidence** : Interventions or activities for which effectiveness has been demonstrated by high quality evidence from rigorously-designed studies, meta-analyses, or systematic reviews, or rigorously-developed clinical practice guidelines

  * Evidence from a meta-analysis or systematic review of research studies that incorporated evidence appraisal and synthesis of the evidence in the analysis 
  * Supportive evidence from a single well-conducted randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
  * Guidelines that are developed by a panel of experts, that derive from an explicit literature search methodology, and include evidence appraisal and synthesis of the evidence 



**1: Regulatory Requirement** : Federal law or regulation

**2: High Evidence** : Interventions or activities for which effectiveness has been demonstrated by evidence from:

  * Good quality systematic review of RCTs 
  * High quality systematic review in which all studies are quasi-experimental or a combination of RCTs and quasi-experimental studies 
  * High quality quasi-experimental study 
  * High quality systematic review in which all studies are non-experimental or include a combination of RCTs, quasi-experimental, and non-experimental studies. Any or all studies may be qualitative. 
  * High quality non-experimental studies 
  * High quality qualitative studies 
  * Good quality clinical practice guideline, consensus or position statement 



**3: Moderate Evidence** : Interventions or activities for which the evidence has been demonstrated by evidence from:

  * Good quality systematic review in which all studies are quasi-experimental or a combination of RCTs and quasi-experimental studies 
  * Good quality quasi-experimental study 
  * High or good quality literature review, case report, expert opinion, or organizational experience 



**4: Limited Evidence** : Interventions or activities for which there are currently insufficient evidence or evidence of low quality

  * Supportive evidence from a poorly conducted research study 
  * Evidence from non-experimental studies with high potential for bias 
  * Guidelines developed largely by consensus or expert opinion 
  * Non-research evidence with insufficient evidence or inconsistent results 
  * Conflicting evidence, but where the preponderance of the evidence supports the recommendation 



**5: Benefits Balanced with Harms** : Selected interventions or activities for which the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) Guidelines Advisory Board is of the opinion that the desirable effects of following this recommendation outweigh the harms

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



The Guideline for Safe Use of Energy-Generating Devices has been approved by the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) Guidelines Advisory Board. It was presented as a proposed guideline for comments by members and others. The guideline is effective September 1, 2016.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## References Supporting the Recommendations

- Dhepe N. Minimum standard guidelines of care on requirements for setting up a laser room. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2009;75 (Suppl 2):S101-S110.
- ECRI Institute. Laser use and safety. Oper Room Risk Manag. 2011:IA.
- Hospital eTools. Surgical suite - use of medical lasers.Washington (DC): Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); [accessed 2016 Jun 27].
- Z136.1: Safe use of lasers. In: ANSI Z136 Standards. Orlando (FL): Laser Institute of America; 2014.
- Z136.3: Safe use of lasers in health care. In: ANSI Z136 Standards. Orlando (FL): Laser Institute of America; 2011.

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The literature was independently evaluated and appraised according to the strength and quality of the evidence. Each article was then assigned an appraisal score. The appraisal score is noted in brackets after each reference in the original guideline document, as applicable. Also see the original guideline document for the systematic review and discussion of evidence.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Risk of injury to surgical patients and perioperative personnel will be reduced. 
  * Refer to the original guideline document for additional discussion of potential benefits of specific interventions. 



## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



  * These recommendations represent the Association's official position on questions regarding optimal perioperative nursing practice. 
  * No attempt has been made to gain consensus among users, manufacturers, and consumers of any material or product. 
  * Compliance with the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) guideline is voluntary. 
  * AORN's recommendations are intended as achievable and represent what is believed to be an optimal level of patient care within surgical and invasive procedure settings. 
  * Although they are considered to represent the optimal level of practice, variations in practice settings and clinical situations may limit the degree to which each recommendation can be implemented. 
  * AORN recognizes the many diverse settings in which perioperative nurses practice; therefore, this guideline is adaptable to all areas where operative or other invasive procedures may be performed. 



# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Mobile Device Resources
- Resources
- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness
- Safety

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Burlingame BL, Conner RL. Guideline for safe use of energy-generating devices. In: 2016 Guidelines for Perioperative Practice. Denver (CO): Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN); 2016 Sep. p. e49-e76. [183 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2016 Sep

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Association of periOperative Registered Nurses - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN)

## Guideline Committee



Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) Guidelines Advisory Board

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Lead Author_ : Byron L. Burlingame, MS, BSN, RN, CNOR, Senior Perioperative Nursing Specialist, AORN Nursing Department, Denver, Colorado

_Contributing Author_ : Ramona L. Conner, MSN, RN, CNOR, Editor-in-Chief, Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, AORN Nursing Department, Denver, Colorado

_Team Members_ : Janice Neil, PhD, RN, CNE, Associate Professor, College of Nursing, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina; Mary Lamonte, MPH, MSN, RN, CNOR, Staff Nurse, Stamford Surgical Center, Stamford, Connecticut; Barbara Nalley, MSN, CRNP, CNOR, RN First Assistant, Jackson Surgical Assistant, Crofton, Maryland; Melanie Sandoval, PhD, RN, ACNP, Perioperative Research Nurse Scientist, University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, Colorado; Jane Flowers, MSN, RN, CNOR, NEA-BC, Nurse Manager, Shore Health System, Easton, Maryland

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



No financial relationships relevant to the content of this guideline have been disclosed by the authors, planners, peer reviewers, or staff.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available to subscribers from the [Association of periOperative Nurses Web (AORN) site](http://www.aorn.org/eSubscription/ "AORN Web site").

Print copies: Available for purchase from the [AORN Web site](http://www.aorn.org/guidelines/purchase-guidelines/print-edition "AORN Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * Evidence table. Guideline for safe use of energy-generating devices. 2016 Sept. 15 p. Available from the [Association of periOperative Nurses (AORN) Web site](http://www.aorn.org/guidelines/about-aorn-guidelines/evidence-tables "AORN Web site"). 



Additional implementation tools, including online learning modules, videos and community discussions, are available from the [AORN Web site](https://www.aorn.org/guidelines/guideline-implementation-topics/equipment-and-product-safety/electrosurgery "AORN Web site").

Documents related to the evidence rating model, hierarchy of evidence, and expanded appraisal tools are available from the [AORN Web site](https://www.aorn.org/guidelines/about-aorn-guidelines/evidence-rating "AORN Web site").

In addition, an AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice eBook mobile app is available from the [AORN Web site](http://www.aorn.org/guidelines/purchase-guidelines/ebook-mobile-app "AORN Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 7, 2017. The information was not verified by the guideline developer.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

