---
title: Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and management algorithms: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel report.
id: 11329
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and management algorithms: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel report.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Irwin RS, French CL, Chang AB, Altman KW, CHEST Expert Cough Panel. Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and management algorithms: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel Report. Chest. 2018 Jan;153(1):196-209. [35 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=29080708 )

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# NEATS Assessment

## Disclosure of Guideline Funding Source

- Yes

## Disclosure and Management of Financial Conflict of Interests

- 5

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Multidisciplinary Group

- Yes

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Methodologist Involvement

- Unknown

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Patient and Public Perspectives

- 4

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Search Strategy

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Study Selection

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Synthesis of Evidence

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Grading the Quality or Strength of Evidence

- 4

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Benefits and Harms of Recommendations

- 2

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Evidence Summary Supporting Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Rating the Strength of Recommendations

- 5

## Specific and Unambiguous Articulation of Recommendations

- 5

## External Review

- 1

## Updating

- 5

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The grades of recommendation ( **1A–2C, consensus-based [CB]** ) and the approach to rating the quality of evidence are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


  1. For adult patients complaining of cough, the Expert Panel suggests that acute cough be defined as being  <3 weeks in duration ( **Grade 2C** ). 
  2. For adult patients complaining of cough, the Expert Panel suggests that subacute cough be defined as being between 3 and 8 weeks in duration ( **Grade 2C** ). 
  3. For adult patients complaining of cough, the Expert Panel suggests that chronic cough be defined as being  >8 weeks in duration ( **Grade 2C** ). 
  4. For adult patients seeking medical care complaining of cough, the Expert Panel suggests that estimating the duration of cough is the first step in narrowing the list of potential diagnoses ( **Grade 2C** ). 
  5. For adult patients around the globe complaining of cough, the Expert Panel suggests that the cough be managed using evidence-based guidelines that are based upon duration of cough ( **Grade 2C** ). 




###  Definitions 


####  American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) Grading System 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) Grading System">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Grade of Recommendation
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Balance of Benefit vs. Risk and Burdens (Strength of the Recommendation: Level 1 or 2)
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Methodologic Strength of Supporting Evidence (Quality of Body of Evidence: A, B, C, or CB)
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Implications
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" colspan="4" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Graded evidence-based guideline recommendations
    </strong>
   </th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence (1A)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Consistent evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) without important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Recommendation can apply to most patients in most circumstances. Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence (1B)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence from RCTs with important limitations (inconsistent results, methodologic flaws, indirect or imprecise), or very strong evidence from observational studies
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Recommendation can apply to most patients in most circumstances. Higher-quality research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Strong recommendation, low- or very-low-quality evidence (1C)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence for at least one critical outcome from observational studies, case series, or from RCTs with serious flaws or indirect evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Recommendation can apply to most patients in many circumstances. Higher-quality research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may well change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak recommendation, high-quality evidence (2A)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Benefits closely balanced with risks and burden
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Consistent evidence from RCTs without important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    The best action may differ depending on circumstances or patient's or societal values. Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence (2B)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Benefits closely balanced with risks and burden
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence from RCTs with important limitations (inconsistent results, methodologic flaws, indirect or imprecise) or very strong evidence from observational studies
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Best action may differ depending on circumstances or patient's or societal values. Higher-quality research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak recommendation, low- or very-low-quality evidence (2C)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Uncertainty in the estimates of benefits, risks, and burden; benefits, risk, and burden may be closely balanced
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence for at least one critical outcome from observational studies, case series, or RCTs, with serious flaws or indirect evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Other alternatives may be equally reasonable. Higher-quality research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may well change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" colspan="4" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Nongraded consensus-based suggestions
    </strong>
   </th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Consensus-based (CB)
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Uncertainty due to lack of evidence but expert opinion that benefits outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Insufficient evidence for a graded recommendation
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Future research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



The following clinical algorithms are provided in the original guideline document: 

  * Acute cough algorithm for the management of patients ≥ 15 years of age with cough lasting < 3 weeks 
  * Subacute cough algorithm for the management of patients ≥ 15 years of age with cough lasting 3 to 8 weeks 
  * Chronic cough algorithm for the management of patients ≥ 15 years of age with cough lasting > 8 weeks 



# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Acute (<3 weeks), subacute (3-8 weeks) and chronic (>8 weeks) cough

## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Management
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Allergy and Immunology
- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Pulmonary Medicine

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians
- Respiratory Care Practitioners

## Guideline Objective(s)



To answer the following key clinical question: Are the American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) 2006 classifications of acute, subacute and chronic cough and associated management algorithms in adults that were based on durations of cough useful?

## Target Population



Adult patients complaining of cough

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Classification of cough based on duration: acute (<3 weeks), subacute (between 3 and 8 weeks), chronic cough (>8 weeks) 
  2. Estimating cough duration to narrow potential diagnoses 
  3. Use of evidence-based guidelines that are based upon duration of cough 



## Major Outcomes Considered



Final diagnosis based on favorable response of cough to treatment

# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



 **Literature Search**

The methods used for this systematic review conformed to those outlined in the article "Methodologies for the Development of CHEST Guidelines and Expert Panel Reports" (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field). Librarians from the University of Massachusetts Medical School undertook searches to answer the question for acute, subacute, and chronic cough. For chronic cough, articles were identified from searches of electronic databases (PubMed and SCOPUS) commencing from their initiation through February 23, 2016. PubMed was relied on to pick up any Cochrane systematic reviews for chronic cough. For acute and subacute cough, articles were identified from searches of PubMed, SCOPUS, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews from their initiation through February 23, 2016. The reference lists of retrieved articles were examined for additional citations. The search terms used are presented in e-Tables 1 and 2 in the online supplement (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field). The titles and abstracts of the search results were independently evaluated by two reviewers to identify potentially relevant articles. The full texts of all potentially relevant articles were retrieved, and two reviewers independently reviewed all retrieved studies. Although a third reviewer was available to adjudicate any disagreements, there were no disagreements. Because a review of articles published before 2006 used a variety of definitions of acute and chronic cough, and subacute cough had not yet been defined, and because the American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) management algorithms for cough were not published until 2006, the authors decided to include only articles published in 2006 and afterward in their analysis.

See the Online Supplement for additional information on search strategy (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

## Number of Source Documents



  * With respect to acute cough, only three studies met the criteria for quality assessment, and all had a high risk of bias. 
  * With respect to subacute cough, only two studies met the criteria for quality assessment, and all had a high risk of bias. 
  * With respect to chronic cough, although all studies were prospective and none mentioned any harms, 11 studies met the criteria for quality assessment and all had a high risk of bias. 



Refer to Figures 1 and 2 in the original guideline document for selections of studies that address the key clinical question.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>See the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



 **Quality Assessment**

Included articles underwent methodological assessment. Quality assessment was carried out if the articles met the following criteria: (1) they were published during 2006 or later; (2) they defined acute, subacute, or chronic cough (or a combination of the three) based on the duration, as described in the methods sections of the articles, and reported the actual durations in the results sections of the articles; and (3) they reported the spectrum and frequency of causes of cough in the study subjects based on response to treatment as described in the results sections of the articles. For randomized controlled trials, quality assessment was carried out with the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool. For observational studies, quality assessment was performed with the Cochrane risk of bias tool for cohort studies. For systematic reviews, quality assessment was done with the Documentation and Appraisal Review Tool.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus (Delphi)

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The authors used the published methodology of the American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) Guideline Oversight Committee to select the Expert Cough Panel Chair and the International Panel of Experts to perform a systematic review, synthesize evidence, and develop recommendations and practice management suggestions. After generating the key clinical question for this systematic review, Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome (PICO) elements were derived to inform the literature review. The question was formulated after polling the existing writing group for key clinical questions related to how best to classify cough. The writing committee unanimously chose to focus on the durations of acute, subacute, and chronic cough and how they had been defined in the 2006 Cough Guidelines. The resultant PICO elements that formed the basis of the subsequent systematic review are presented in Table 1 in the original guideline document.

**Practice Recommendations/Suggestions**

The findings of this systematic review were used to support the evidence-graded recommendations or suggestions. A structured consensus-based modified Delphi approach was used to provide expert advice on guidance statements. In this regard, for a recommendation or suggestion to be approved by the Expert Cough Panel, 75% of the eligible panel members had to vote, and 80% of those voting had to strongly agree or agree with the statement. In the context of practice recommendations, a strong recommendation applies to almost all patients, whereas a weak recommendation is conditional and applies to only some patients. The strength of recommendation here is based on consideration of three factors: balance of benefits to harms, patient values and preferences, and resource considerations. Harms incorporate risks and burdens to the patients that can include convenience or lack of convenience, difficulty of administration, and invasiveness. These, in turn, impact patient preferences. A patient representative who had been a member of the Cough Panel provided patient-centered input for this guideline and approved of the suggestions contained herein. The resource considerations go beyond economics and should also factor in time and other indirect costs. The authors of these recommendations or suggestions have considered these parameters in determining the strength of the recommendations or suggestions and associated grades.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) Grading System**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Grade of Recommendation
</th>  
<th>

Balance of Benefit vs. Risk and Burdens (Strength of the Recommendation: Level 1 or 2)
</th>  
<th>

Methodologic Strength of Supporting Evidence (Quality of Body of Evidence: A, B, C, or CB)
</th>  
<th>

Implications
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**Graded evidence-based guideline recommendations**
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence (1A)
</td>  
<td>

Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
</td>  
<td>

Consistent evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) without important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies
</td>  
<td>

Recommendation can apply to most patients in most circumstances. Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence (1B)
</td>  
<td>

Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
</td>  
<td>

Evidence from RCTs with important limitations (inconsistent results, methodologic flaws, indirect or imprecise), or very strong evidence from observational studies
</td>  
<td>

Recommendation can apply to most patients in most circumstances. Higher-quality research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Strong recommendation, low- or very-low-quality evidence (1C)
</td>  
<td>

Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
</td>  
<td>

Evidence for at least one critical outcome from observational studies, case series, or from RCTs with serious flaws or indirect evidence
</td>  
<td>

Recommendation can apply to most patients in many circumstances. Higher-quality research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may well change the estimate.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Weak recommendation, high-quality evidence (2A)
</td>  
<td>

Benefits closely balanced with risks and burden
</td>  
<td>

Consistent evidence from RCTs without important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies
</td>  
<td>

The best action may differ depending on circumstances or patient's or societal values. Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence (2B)
</td>  
<td>

Benefits closely balanced with risks and burden
</td>  
<td>

Evidence from RCTs with important limitations (inconsistent results, methodologic flaws, indirect or imprecise) or very strong evidence from observational studies
</td>  
<td>

Best action may differ depending on circumstances or patient's or societal values. Higher-quality research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Weak recommendation, low- or very-low-quality evidence (2C)
</td>  
<td>

Uncertainty in the estimates of benefits, risks, and burden; benefits, risk, and burden may be closely balanced
</td>  
<td>

Evidence for at least one critical outcome from observational studies, case series, or RCTs, with serious flaws or indirect evidence 
</td>  
<td>

Other alternatives may be equally reasonable. Higher-quality research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may well change the estimate.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**Nongraded consensus-based suggestions**
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Consensus-based (CB)
</td>  
<td>

Uncertainty due to lack of evidence but expert opinion that benefits outweigh risk and burdens or vice versa
</td>  
<td>

Insufficient evidence for a graded recommendation
</td>  
<td>

Future research may well have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Refer to the "Methodologies" documents for information on the review processes (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Although the classification and management of acute, subacute, and chronic cough based on its duration were proposed in the 2006 guidelines, it was not known until this systematic review that the definitions were being used around the globe and that the management algorithms would accurately predict the most common causes of acute, subacute, and chronic cough.

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



American College of Chest Physician guidelines are intended for general information only, are not medical advice, and do not replace professional medical care and physician advice, which always should be sought for any medical condition. The complete disclaimer for this guideline can be accessed at <http://www.chestnet.org/Guidelines-and-Resources/Guidelines-and-Consensus-Statements/CHEST-Guidelines>.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Irwin RS, French CL, Chang AB, Altman KW, CHEST Expert Cough Panel. Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and management algorithms: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel Report. Chest. 2018 Jan;153(1):196-209. [35 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=29080708 )

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2018 Jan

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American College of Chest Physicians - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



The authors have reported to _CHEST_ that no funding was received for this study.

## Guideline Committee



American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) Expert Cough Panel

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Richard S. Irwin, MD, Master FCCP; Cynthia L. French, PhD, RN, ANP-BC, FCCP; Anne B. Chang, MBBS, PhD, MPH; Kenneth W. Altman, MD, PhD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



 **Financial/Nonfinancial Disclosures**

The authors have reported to _CHEST_ the following: R. S. I. and C. L.F. are codevelopers of the Cough Quality of Life Questionnaire and have received less than $400 each in the past 6 years to support its further development. Although R. S. I. is the Editor in Chief of _CHEST_ , the review and all editorial decisions regarding this manuscript were independently made by others. K. W. A. discloses consultations with KayPentax, receiving $300, Bayer, receiving $800, and 5AM Ventures, receiving $550, which was all donated to the American Laryngological Association. None declared (A. B. C.).

## Guideline Endorser(s)

- American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology - Medical Specialty Society
- American Thoracic Society - Medical Specialty Society
- Asian Pacific Society of Respirology - Disease Specific Society
- Canadian Thoracic Society - Medical Specialty Society
- Irish Thoracic Society - Medical Specialty Society

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [CHEST Journal Web site](http://journal.chestnet.org/article/S0012-3692%2817%2932918-5/pdf "CHEST Journal Web site"). Also available to CHEST Journal subscribers through the [CHEST app](http://www.chestnet.org/Publications/Mobile-Offerings/CHEST-Journal-App "CHEST Web site") for iOS and Android.

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available: 

  * Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and management algorithms. Online supplement. CHEST. 2018 Jan. 3 p. Available from the [CHEST Journal Web site](http://journal.chestnet.org/cms/attachment/2118902491/2086497225/mmc1.pdf "CHEST Journal Web site"). 
  * Lewis SZ, Diekemper RL, French CT, Gold PM, Irwin RS. Methodologies for the development of the management of cough: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel report. Chest. 2014 Jul;146(5):1395-402. Available from the [CHEST Journal Web site](http://journal.chestnet.org/article/S0012-3692\(15\)52408-2/pdf "CHEST Journal Web site").  
  * Lewis SZ, Diekemper RL, Ornelas J, Casey KR. Methodologies for the development of CHEST guidelines and Expert Panel reports. Chest. 2014 Jul;146(1):182-92. Available from the [CHEST Journal Web site](http://journal.chestnet.org/article/S0012-3692\(15\)48763-X/pdf "CHEST Journal Web site"). 
  * Irwin RS, French CT, Lewis SZ, Diekemper RL, Gold PM. Overview of the management of cough: CHEST guideline and Expert Panel report. Chest. 2014(4):885-9. Available from the [CHEST Journal Web site](http://journal.chestnet.org/article/S0012-3692\(15\)33169-X/pdf "CHEST Journal Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 15, 2018. The guideline developer agreed to not review the content.

This NEATS assessment was completed by ECRI Institute on March 20, 2018. The guideline developer agreed to not review the content. 

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

