---
id: 5733
---

# General

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Bassand JP, Hamm CW, Ardissino D, Boersma E, Budaj A, Fernandez-Aviles F, Fox KA, Hasdai D, Ohman EM, Wallentin L, Wijns W, ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG), Vahanian A, Camm J, De Caterina R, Dean V, Dickstein K, Filippatos G, Kristensen SD, Widimsky P, McGregor K, Sechtem U, Tendera M, Hellemans I, Gomez JL, Silber S, Funck-Brentano C, Kristensen SD, Andreotti F, Benzer W, Bertrand M, Betriu A, De Caterina R, DeSutter J, Falk V, Ortiz AF, Gitt A, Hasin Y, Huber K, Kornowski R, Lopez-Sendon J, Morais J, Nordrehaug JE, Silber S, Steg PG, Thygesen K, Tubaro M, Turpie AG, Verheugt F, Windecker S, Task Force for Diagnosis and Treatment of Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2007 Jul;28(13):1598-660. [514 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17569677)

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Bassand JP, Hamm CW, Ardissino D, Boersma E, Budaj A, Fernandez-Aviles F, Fox KA, Hasdai D, Ohman EM, Wallentin L, Wijns W, ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG), Vahanian A, Camm J, De Caterina R, Dean V, Dickstein K, Filippatos G, Kristensen SD, Widimsky P, McGregor K, Sechtem U, Tendera M, Hellemans I, Gomez JL, Silber S, Funck-Brentano C, Kristensen SD, Andreotti F, Benzer W, Bertrand M, Betriu A, De Caterina R, DeSutter J, Falk V, Ortiz AF, Gitt A, Hasin Y, Huber K, Kornowski R, Lopez-Sendon J, Morais J, Nordrehaug JE, Silber S, Steg PG, Thygesen K, Tubaro M, Turpie AG, Verheugt F, Windecker S, Task Force for Diagnosis and Treatment of Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2007 Jul;28(13):1598-660. [514 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17569677)

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer

The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

