---
id: 9488
permalink: /:collection/9488
---

# General

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Lampert R, Hayes DL, Annas GJ, Farley MA, Goldstein NE, Hamilton RM, Kay GN, Kramer DB, Mueller PS, Padeletti L, Pozuelo L, Schoenfeld MH, Vardas PE, Wiegand DL, Zellner R, American College of Cardiology, American Geriatrics Society, American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, American Heart Association, European Heart Rhythm Association, Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association. HRS expert consensus statement on the management of cardiovascular implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) in patients nearing end of life or requesting withdrawal of therapy. Heart Rhythm. 2010 Jul;7(7):1008-26. [115 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20471915)

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Lampert R, Hayes DL, Annas GJ, Farley MA, Goldstein NE, Hamilton RM, Kay GN, Kramer DB, Mueller PS, Padeletti L, Pozuelo L, Schoenfeld MH, Vardas PE, Wiegand DL, Zellner R, American College of Cardiology, American Geriatrics Society, American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, American Heart Association, European Heart Rhythm Association, Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association. HRS expert consensus statement on the management of cardiovascular implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) in patients nearing end of life or requesting withdrawal of therapy. Heart Rhythm. 2010 Jul;7(7):1008-26. [115 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20471915)

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer

The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

