---
title: "An evidence-based approach to patient selection for emergency department thoracotomy: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma."
id: 10794
---

# General

## Guideline Title

An evidence-based approach to patient selection for emergency department thoracotomy: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Seamon MJ, Haut ER, Van Arendonk K, Barbosa RR, Chiu WC, Dente CJ, Fox N, Jawa RS, Khwaja K, Lee JK, Magnotti LJ, Mayglothling JA, McDonald AA, Rowell S, To KB, Falck-Ytter Y, Rhee P. An evidence-based approach to patient selection for emergency department thoracotomy: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015 Jul;79(1):159-73. [93 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26091330)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The strength of recommendation ( **strong** or **weak/conditional** ) and levels of evidence ( **high** , **moderate** , **low** or **very low** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Population, Intervention, Comparator, and Outcome (PICO) Question 1 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury (P), does emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


Despite **moderate overall quality of evidence** (see Fig. 1 in the original guideline document) for both critical outcomes, subcommittee panelists believed that patients would strongly favor undergoing EDT in this clinical scenario because of the substantial improvements in both survival and neurologically intact survival over patients resuscitated without EDT. For these reasons, a **strong recommendation** was made, implying that most patients would want the recommended course of action and only a small proportion would not. 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury, the panel **strongly recommends** that patients undergo EDT. This recommendation is based on **moderate quality of evidence** and places emphasis on patient preference for improved survival and neurologically intact survival after EDT. 


###  PICO Question 2 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury (P), does EDT versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


Despite **moderate overall quality of evidence** for both critical outcomes (see Fig. 2 in the original guideline document) subcommittee panelists believed that a majority of patients would favor undergoing EDT in this clinical scenario because of the improvements in both survival and neurologically intact survival over patients resuscitated without EDT. The panel recognizes that the duration of time without signs of life is a vital component to the decision-making process, but an evidentiary basis for exact length of arrest times is extremely limited. For these reasons, a **conditional recommendation** is made, implying that, although most patients would want the recommended course of action, others would not. 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury, the panel **conditionally recommends** that patients undergo EDT. This recommendation is based on **moderate quality of evidence** and places emphasis on patient preference for improved survival and neurologically intact survival after EDT but also acknowledges that elapsed time without signs of life is an important component. 


###  PICO Question 3 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury (P), does EDT versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


Despite **moderate overall quality of evidence** for both critical outcomes (see Fig. 3 in original guideline document), subcommittee panelists believed that a majority of patients would favor undergoing EDT in this clinical scenario because of the improvements in both survival and neurologically intact survival over patients resuscitated without EDT. The panel recognizes that all extrathoracic injury locations such as the neck, abdomen, and extremities may not have equivalent salvage rates after EDT. For these reasons, a **conditional recommendation** is made. 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury, the panel **conditionally recommends** that patients undergo EDT. This recommendation does not pertain to patients with isolated cranial injuries. This recommendation is based on **moderate quality of evidence** and places emphasis on patient preference for improved survival and neurologically intact survival after EDT but also acknowledges that penetrating injuries to all extrathoracic anatomic areas will not have equivalent salvage rates after EDT. 


###  PICO Question 4 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury (P), does EDT versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


Although all voting members of the subcommittee sought a conditional recommendation, 11 members voted in favor of EDT and 4 voted against the procedure based on the PICO No. 4 Evidence Profile. Group disagreement and **low quality of evidence** for both critical outcomes (see Fig. 4 in original guideline document) led to a **conditional recommendation** . 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury, the panel **conditionally recommends** that patients undergo EDT. This recommendation does not pertain to patients with isolated cranial injuries and is based on **low quality of evidence** . The majority of subcommittee members believed that most patients would prefer undergoing EDT in hopes of improved survival and neurologically intact survival. 


###  PICO Question 5 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after blunt injury (P), does EDT versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


With a **moderate overall quality of evidence** for both critical outcomes (see Fig. 5 in the original guideline document), subcommittee panelists believed that most patients would favor undergoing EDT in this clinical scenario because of the improvements in both survival and neurologically intact survival over patients resuscitated without EDT. However, the subcommittee recognizes that many patients would not want to undergo EDT after blunt injury because of the possibility of concomitant severe traumatic brain injury and poor neurologic outcome in survivors. 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after blunt injury, the panel **conditionally recommends** that patients undergo EDT. This recommendation is based on **moderate quality of evidence** and places emphasis on patient preference for improved survival and neurologically intact survival after EDT. 


###  PICO Question 6 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after blunt injury (P), does EDT versus resuscitation without EDT (C) improve hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival (O)? 


####  Recommendation 


Although subcommittee members unanimously voted against the performance of EDT based on the PICO No. 6 Evidence Profile, 10 members voted for a "strong" recommendation and 5 voted for a "conditional" recommendation. Group disagreement regarding the recommendation strength and **low quality of evidence** for both critical outcomes (see Fig. 6 in original guideline document) led to a **conditional recommendation** . Subcommittee panelists believed that a majority of patients would not favor undergoing EDT in this clinical scenario because of the dismal survival and likelihood of poor neurologic outcome. 


In patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after blunt injury, the panel **conditionally recommends** against the performance of EDT. This recommendation is based on **low quality of evidence** and reflects subcommittee group disagreement regarding the strength of the unanimous recommendation against EDT. 


###  Definitions 


####  Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Methodology Levels for Rating the Quality of Evidence 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Methodology Levels for Rating the Quality of Evidence">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Quality Level
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Definitions
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    High
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Very confident that the true effect lies close to estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Moderate
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Moderate effect; true effect is likely close to estimate of effect but may be substantially different.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Low
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Limited confidence; true effect may be substantially different from estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    Very Low
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Little confidence; true effect likely substantially different from estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  GRADE Definition of Strong and Weak Recommendation 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Grading of Recommendations Assessment Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) Definition of Strong and Weak Recommendation">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Strong Recommendation
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Weak/Conditional Recommendation
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    For patients
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Most patients would want the recommended course of action.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Most patients would want the recommended course of action, but many would not.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    For clinicians
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Most patients should receive the recommended course of action.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Different choices will exist for different patients, and clinicians should help patients decide.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    For policy makers
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Recommended course should be adopted as policy.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Considerable debate and stakeholder involvement needed to make policy.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Critical injury requiring resuscitation

## Guideline Category

- Evaluation
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Critical Care
- Emergency Medicine

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To provide clear evidence-based recommendations for the physician facing the most common presenting clinical scenarios after critical injury 
  * To provide an evidence-based framework from which clinicians can make rapid decisions regarding further resuscitation with emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) or futility 
  * To evaluate whether EDT (vs. resuscitation without EDT) improves outcomes in patients who present to the hospital pulseless after critical injuries 



## Target Population


  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury 
  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury 
  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury 
  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury 
  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after blunt injury 
  * Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after blunt injury 



## Interventions and Practices Considered



Emergency department thoracotomy (EDT)

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Hospital survival 
  * Neurologically intact hospital survival 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Inclusion Criteria for This Review**

**Study Types**

For the purposes of making recommendations, studies included prospective observational or retrospective studies without controls and case series.

**Participant Types**

All patients who underwent emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) regardless of age, sex, ethnicity, or comorbidities were included. Only studies that involved resuscitative EDT were included, whereas those involving either prehospital resuscitative thoracotomy or operating room thoracotomy were excluded from the analysis. Meta analyses, reviews without original data, case reports, and letters were excluded.

**Intervention Type**

The authors included studies in which EDT was performed in the above populations with the above measured outcomes. No direct comparator population exists in the literature; therefore, baseline risk of hospital survival for patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with each of the above conditions was estimated by the subcommittee as presented in the Evidence Profiles.

**Outcome Measure Types**

Relevant outcomes including hospital survival, neurologically intact hospital survival, health care personnel exposure to blood-borne pathogens, and costs were independently rated by each individual member of the subcommittee. Only hospital survival and neurologically intact hospital survival were deemed "critical" outcomes necessary to decision making, whereas blood-borne pathogen exposure was "moderately" important and costs were of minimal importance to the group. However, the authors recognize that exposure is an important consideration for many clinicians when deciding whether or not to perform an EDT and a review of the topic is included in the present article for reference.

**Review Methods**

**Electronic Search**

A systematic search using the PubMed and EMBASE databases was performed using the following combination of the Medical Subject Headings (MESH) terms and related key words: thoracotomy, emergency medical services, emergency treatment, emergencies, emergency room, emergency department, emergency service, and emergency ward. The guideline committee included only articles available in English. Bibliographies of included studies were also reviewed to find potential additional articles for study inclusion.

**Study Selection**

Titles and abstracts from the electronic search were screened for relevance to each Population, Intervention, Comparator, and Outcome (PICO) question. Studies initially deemed relevant for inclusion then underwent full text review by the subcommittee to determine final appropriateness for inclusion.

**Study Definition: Signs of Life**

Signs of life, often used interchangeably with vital signs, were defined for the present study as defined by American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma in 2001. Signs of life were considered present with any of the following: pupillary response, spontaneous ventilation, presence of carotid pulse, measureable or palpable blood pressure, extremity movement, or cardiac electrical activity.

**Results**

The literature search yielded 2,152 studies of which 2,031 were removed after title and abstract review. The subcommittee reviewed 121 full articles of which 48 were excluded (24 operating room thoracotomy studies, 8 prehospital resuscitative thoracotomy studies, 16 studies did not address PICO questions or chosen outcomes).

## Number of Source Documents



Ultimately, 72 studies were used in this guideline for recommendations. See the supplemental digital content (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field) for a PRISMA flow diagram of the systematic review phases.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Methodology Levels for Rating the Quality of Evidence</span></strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Methodology Levels for Rating the Quality of Evidence">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Quality Level</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Definitions</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">High</th>
            <td valign="top">Very confident that the true effect lies close to estimate of effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Moderate</th>
            <td valign="top">Moderate effect; true effect is likely close to estimate of effect but may be substantially different.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Low</th>
            <td valign="top">Limited confidence; true effect may be substantially different from estimate of effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row">Very Low</th>
            <td valign="top">Little confidence; true effect likely substantially different from estimate of effect.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



 **Review Methods**

**Data Extraction and Management**

Data were extracted using a standardized Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and consisted of the study authors, location, publication year, journal, methodology, and the relevant outcome measures with respect to emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) survival predictors. All entered data were checked in triplicate to ensure accuracy.

**Assessment of Methodological Quality**

The articles were evaluated using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system and documented in each Evidence Profile figure. The quality of evidence was evaluated for each of the following domains: risk of bias, inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias.

**Measures of Treatment Effect**

Data on hospital survival and neurologically intact survival after EDT were collected from the included studies. The 95% confidence intervals for these event rates were calculated using the exact mid-P method. As described, no comparison or control group (i.e., no survival or neurologically intact survival data for similar groups of patients who did not undergo EDT) was available for the Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes (PICO) questions of interest and prompted thorough consultation with GRADE methodology experts. Relative effects and risk differences were then estimated by comparing the event rates with EDT with the expected probability of survival without EDT as estimated by the subcommittee. To this end, individual subcommittee members were polled to predict patient survival without EDT but with standard resuscitation including large bore access, blood product and crystalloid infusion, thoracostomy tube placement, and emergent transport to the operative suite as necessary for each PICO. One high and low outlier response was excluded for each PICO and the remaining responses used to calculate the mean estimated probability of survival without EDT. These estimates were then presented as the comparison group for each PICO. Without a control group in each constituent study, meta-analyses, assessments of heterogeneity, and confidence intervals for relative treatment effects were not calculable as a result.

Before evaluating the combinations of survival predictors for each PICO question, an analysis of each individual EDT survival predictor alone was undertaken across all 72 studies and presented in Table 1 in the original guideline document.

Please refer to the original guideline document for details of the qualitative synthesis performed for each PICO question.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Within the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) framework, the committee performed a systematic review and developed evidence-based recommendations to answer the following PICO (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes) question: should patients who present pulseless after critical injuries (with and without signs of life after penetrating thoracic, extrathoracic, or blunt injuries) undergo emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) (vs. resuscitation without EDT) to improve survival and neurologically intact survival?

The PICO questions were as follows:

**Population**

  1. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury 
  2. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating thoracic injury 
  3. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury 
  4. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after penetrating extrathoracic injury 
  5. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department with signs of life after blunt injury 
  6. Patients presenting pulseless to the emergency department without signs of life after blunt injury 



**Intervention** : EDT

**Comparator** : Resuscitation without EDT

**Outcomes** :

  1. Hospital survival 
  2. Neurologically intact hospital survival 



The strength of recommendations was based on the quality of evidence, risk-versus-benefit ratio, and patient values/preferences and was classified as "strong" (prefaced by "strongly recommend") or "weak" (prefaced by "conditionally recommend").

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Grading of Recommendations Assessment Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) Definition of Strong and Weak Recommendation**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

 
</th>  
<th>

Strong Recommendation
</th>  
<th>

Weak/Conditional Recommendation
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

For patients
</td>  
<td>

Most patients would want the recommended course of action.
</td>  
<td>

Most patients would want the recommended course of action, but many would not.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

For clinicians
</td>  
<td>

Most patients should receive the recommended course of action.
</td>  
<td>

Different choices will exist for different patients, and clinicians should help patients decide.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

For policy makers
</td>  
<td>

Recommended course should be adopted as policy.
</td>  
<td>

Considerable debate and stakeholder involvement needed to make policy.
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Not stated

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate selection of patients who may benefit from emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) by survival and neurologically intact survival

## Potential Harms



  * When treating moribund trauma victims presenting in extremis, clinicians are forced to make immediate life-or-death decisions for their patients—decisions that attempt to balance the last chance of survival with the risk of salvaging patients with severe anoxic encephalopathy or exposing health care providers to blood-borne pathogens. 
  * When needlestick or cut exposure transmission rates (human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], 0.3%; hepatitis B virus [HBV], 6% to 30%; hepatitis C virus [HCV], 1.8% [0% to 7%]) from known seropositive blood are considered, it is imperative that universal precautions are maintained for all resuscitations. 



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements


  * The Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) is a multi-disciplinary professional society committed to improving the care of injured patients. The Ad Hoc Committee for Practice Management Guideline Development of EAST develops and disseminates evidence-based information to increase the scientific knowledge needed to enhance patient and clinical decision-making, improve health care quality, and promote efficiency in the organization of public and private systems of health care delivery. Unless specifically stated otherwise, the opinions expressed and statements made in this publication reflect the authors' personal observations and do not imply endorsement by nor official policy of EAST. 
  * "Clinical practice guidelines are systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances."* These guidelines are not fixed protocols that must be followed, but are intended for health care professionals and providers to consider. While they identify and describe generally recommended courses of intervention, they are not presented as a substitute for the advice of a physician or other knowledgeable health care professional or provider. Individual patients may require different treatments from those specified in a given guideline. Guidelines are not entirely inclusive or exclusive of all methods of reasonable care that can obtain/produce the same results. While guidelines can be written that take into account variations in clinical settings, resources, or common patient characteristics, they cannot address the unique needs of each patient nor the combination of resources available to a particular community or health care professional or provider. Deviations from clinical practice guidelines may be justified by individual circumstances. Thus, guidelines must be applied based on individual patient needs using professional judgment 
  * These guidelines represent a very detailed summary of the literature regarding emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) after six common clinical presentation scenarios. The vast majority of studies used within these guidelines are from major urban Trauma Centers—as such, their data and the resulting recommendations may not be applicable to community or rural centers. The guidelines are intended to inform the decision-making process rather than replace clinical judgment. 



*Institute of Medicine. Clinical practice guidelines: directions for a new program. MJ Field and KN Lohr (eds) Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 1990: pg 39.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- End of Life Care
- Getting Better

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Seamon MJ, Haut ER, Van Arendonk K, Barbosa RR, Chiu WC, Dente CJ, Fox N, Jawa RS, Khwaja K, Lee JK, Magnotti LJ, Mayglothling JA, McDonald AA, Rowell S, To KB, Falck-Ytter Y, Rhee P. An evidence-based approach to patient selection for emergency department thoracotomy: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015 Jul;79(1):159-73. [93 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26091330)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2015 Jul

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



None

## Guideline Committee



Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) Practice Management Guidelines Section

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Mark J. Seamon, MD; Elliott R. Haut, MD, PhD; Kyle Van Arendonk, MD; Ronald R. Barbosa, MD; William C. Chiu, MD; Christopher J. Dente, MD; Nicole Fox, MD; Randeep S. Jawa, MD; Kosar Khwaja, MD; J. Kayle Lee, MD; Louis J. Magnotti, MD; Julie A. Mayglothling, MD; Amy A. McDonald, MD; Susan Rowell, MD, MCR; Kathleen B. To, MD; Yngve Falck-Ytter, MD; Peter Rhee, MD, MPH

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

E.R.H. is the primary investigator of a contract (CE-12-11-4489) with The Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) entitled "Preventing Venous Thromboembolism: Empowering Patients and Enabling Patient-Centered Care via Health Information Technology." E.R.H. receives royalties from Lippincott, Williams, Wilkins for the book _Avoiding Common ICU Errors_. E.R.H. is a paid speaker and consultant for the "Preventing Avoidable Venous Thromboembolism —Every Patient, Every Time" VHA IMPERATIV Advantage Performance Improvement Collaborative. E.R.H. is a member of the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) Board of Directors and was the former Chair of the EAST Guidelines Section.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) Web site](https://www.east.org/Content/documents/practicemanagementguidelines/TA%2079-1_Seamon%20et%20al.pdf "EAST Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * An evidence-based approach to patient selection for emergency department thoracotomy: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. Supplemental digital content. 2015 Jul. Available from the [Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery Web site](http://journals.lww.com/jtrauma/Fulltext/2015/07000/An_evidence_based_approach_to_patient_selection.24.aspx=ej-article-sam-container "Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery Web site"). 
  * Kerwin AJ, Haut ER, Burns JB, Como JJ, Haider A, Stassen N, Dahm P, Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma Practice Management Guidelines Ad Hoc Committee. The Eastern Association of the Surgery of Trauma approach to practice management guideline development using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012 Nov;73(5 Suppl 4):S283-7. Available from the [Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) Web site](https://www.east.org/content/documents/east_approach_to_grade.pdf "EAST Web site"). 



In addition, a continuing medical education (CME) activity for this guideline is available in the [original guideline document](https://www.east.org/Content/documents/practicemanagementguidelines/TA%2079-1_Seamon%20et%20al.pdf "EAST Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on November 3, 2015. The information was verified by the guideline developer on November 19, 2015.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is copyrighted by the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST).

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

