---
title: "The Society of Thoracic Surgeons guidelines on the diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer."
id: 9961
---

# General

## Guideline Title

The Society of Thoracic Surgeons guidelines on the diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Varghese TK Jr, Hofstetter WL, Rizk NP, Low DE, Darling GE, Watson TJ, Mitchell JD, Krasna MJ. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons guidelines on the diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Jul;96(1):346-56. [78 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23752201)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The levels of evidence ( **A–C** ) and classification of recommendations ( **I–IV** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


####  Diagnosis of Esophageal Cancer 


#####  Class I Recommendation: Flexible endoscopy with biopsy is the primary method for the diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma. (Level of Evidence B) 


####  Staging of Esophageal Cancer 


**Note** : For the remaining recommendations, the following definitions will be used: early stage cancer refers to nodular high-grade dysplasia or T1a as defined by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS); locoregionalized esophageal cancer refers to esophageal cancers from T1b to T4, any N, and M0; and distant metastatic disease refers to M1 disease. 


  * _Class I Recommendation_ : For early stage esophageal cancer, computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen is an optional test for staging. **(Level of Evidence B)**
  * _Class I Recommendation_ : For locoregionalized esophageal cancer, CT of the chest and abdomen is a recommended test for staging. **(Level of Evidence B)**
  * _Class IIB Recommendation_ : For early stage esophageal cancer, positron emission tomography (PET) is an optional test for staging. **(Level of Evidence B)**
  * _Class I Recommendation_ : For locoregionalized esophageal cancer, PET is a recommended test for staging. **(Level of Evidence B)**
  * _Class IIA Recommendation_ : In the absence of metastatic disease, EUS is recommended to improve the accuracy of clinical staging. **(Level of Evidence B)**
  * _Class IIA Recommendation_ : Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) should be considered as a diagnostic/staging tool for small, discrete nodules or areas of dysplasia when the disease appears limited to the mucosa or submucosa as assessed by EUS. **(Level of Evidence B)**




####  Metastasis 


#####  Class IIB Recommendation: For locally advanced (T3/T4) adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction infiltrating the anatomic cardia or Siewart type III esophagogastric tumors, laparoscopy is recommended to improve the accuracy of staging. (Level of Evidence C) 


###  Definitions: 


####  Level of Evidence That Best Fits the Recommendation 


**Level A** : Multiple populations evaluated. Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta-analyses. 


**Level B** : Limited populations evaluated. Data derived from a single randomized trial or non-randomized studies. 


**Level C** : Very limited populations evaluated. Only consensus opinion of experts, case studies, or standard of care are available. 


####  Classification of Recommendations 


**Class I (benefit > > > risk) ** : Procedure/treatment SHOULD be performed/administered. 


**Class IIA (benefit > > risk) ** : Additional studies with focused objectives needed. IT IS REASONABLE to perform procedure/administer treatment. 


**Class IIB (benefit > risk) ** : Additional studies with broad objectives needed; additional registry data would be helpful. Procedure/treatment MAY BE CONSIDERED. 


**Class III (no benefit)** : Procedure/test, not helpful. Treatment, no proven benefit. 


**Class IV (harm)** : Procedure, without benefit or harmful. Treatment, harmful to patients. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Esophageal cancer

## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Evaluation

## Clinical Specialty

- Gastroenterology
- Oncology
- Pathology
- Radiology
- Thoracic Surgery

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To systematically review the literature with regard to the diagnostic workup and staging of esophageal cancer 
  * To assist health-care providers in clinical decision-making by providing a range of acceptable approaches for the management of specific conditions 



## Target Population



Patients at risk or with a diagnosis of esophageal cancer

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Flexible endoscopy with biopsy for diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma 
  2. Staging of esophageal cancer: 
    * Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen 
    * Positron emission tomography (PET) 
    * Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) 
    * Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) 
    * Laparoscopy 



## Major Outcomes Considered



Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of diagnostic studies

# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



For this systematic review on the diagnosis and staging of esophageal cancer, specific search terms were identified and targeted searches were run in PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane databases in June 2011. The results were limited to publications since 1990, and human subjects. The authors augmented the computerized literature search by manually reviewing the reference lists of identified studies and relevant reviews. In addition, the writing group identified articles from personal files. The following three medical subject heading (MeSH) terms were used: "esophageal neoplasms," "early detection of cancer," and "neoplasm staging." Additional search strategies incorporated the MeSH subheadings of "analysis," "anatomy and histology," "classification," "diagnosis," "diagnostic use," "histology," "methods," "pathology," "standards," "trends," "ultrasonography," "positron emission tomography," and "trends."

In all, 4,064 articles and abstracts were identified through the initial EMBASE search, and 2,874 articles were identified through PubMed/MEDLINE. The Cochrane database identified 2 additional reviews and 191 clinical trials. Abstracts were reviewed by at least two authors and excluded if data were duplicative, not specifying esophageal cancer, purely descriptive, or incomplete. The resulting 80 articles served as the source for the review; 46 are cited and the remaining are listed in the appendix in the original guideline document.

## Number of Source Documents



80 articles served as the source for the review.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Level of Evidence That Best Fits the Recommendation</strong></p>
<p><strong>Level A</strong>: Multiple populations evaluated. Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta-analyses.</p>
<p><strong>Level B</strong>: Limited populations evaluated. Data derived from a single randomized trial or non-randomized studies.</p>
<p><strong>Level C</strong>: Very limited populations evaluated. Only consensus opinion of experts, case studies, or standard of care are available.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



A task force was assembled through the Workforce on Evidence Based Surgery and the General Thoracic Surgery Workforce of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) with the goal of addressing the factors affecting the treatment of localized esophageal cancer.

Guideline recommendations were formulated and reviewed by all members of the writing group before approval by the Workforce on Evidence Based Surgery and the STS Executive Committee.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Classification of Recommendations**

**Class I (benefit > > > risk)**: Procedure/treatment SHOULD be performed/administered.

**Class IIA (benefit > > risk)**: Additional studies with focused objectives needed. IT IS REASONABLE to perform procedure/administer treatment.

**Class IIB (benefit > risk)**: Additional studies with broad objectives needed; additional registry data would be helpful. Procedure/treatment MAY BE CONSIDERED.

**Class III (no benefit)** : Procedure/test, not helpful. Treatment, no proven benefit.

**Class IV (harm)** : Procedure, without benefit or harmful. Treatment, harmful to patients.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Guideline recommendations were reviewed by all members of the writing group before approval by the Workforce on Evidence Based Surgery and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) Executive Committee.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Appropriate diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer 
  * There is increasing evidence that multimodality therapy (neoadjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or both, followed by esophagectomy) has increased survival benefits when compared with surgery alone for more advanced stages. Accurate staging information is thus critical for the determination of appropriate therapeutic intervention. 



## Potential Harms



**Endoscopic Ultrasonography**

As endoscopic ultrasound probes are typically larger in size, care should be used when attempting biopsies in the setting of stricture, in particular when dilating the tumor stricture.

**Diagnostic Endoscopic Mucosal Resection**

Perforation risk and bleeding risk are the most relevant and range from less than 1% to 2%, respectively.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Clinical Practice Guidelines are intended to assist physicians and other health care providers in clinical decision making by describing a range of generally acceptable approaches for the diagnosis, management, or prevention of specific diseases or conditions. These guidelines should not be considered inclusive of all proper methods of care or exclusive of other methods of care reasonably directed at obtaining the same results. Moreover, these guidelines are subject to change over time, without notice. The ultimate judgment regarding the care of a particular patient must be made by the physician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Chart Documentation/Checklists/Forms

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Varghese TK Jr, Hofstetter WL, Rizk NP, Low DE, Darling GE, Watson TJ, Mitchell JD, Krasna MJ. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons guidelines on the diagnosis and staging of patients with esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Jul;96(1):346-56. [78 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23752201)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Jul

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Society of Thoracic Surgeons - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



Society of Thoracic Surgeons

## Guideline Committee



Society of Thoracic Surgeons Workforces on Evidence Based Surgery and General Thoracic Surgery

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Workforce Members_ : Thomas K. Varghese, Jr, MD, MS; Wayne L. Hofstetter, MD; Nabil P. Rizk, MD; Donald E. Low, MD; Gail E. Darling, MD; Thomas J. Watson, MD; John D. Mitchell, MD; Mark J. Krasna, MD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Drs. Varghese, Hofstetter, Rizk, Low, Darling, Watson, Mitchell, and Krasna have no conflicts of interest to declare regarding this work.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Society of Thoracic Surgeons Web site](http://www.sts.org/publications-resources/guidelines/diagnosis-and-staging-patients-esophageal-cancer "Society of Thoracic Surgeons Web site").

Print copies: Available from The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, 633 N. Saint Clair St., Suite 2320, Chicago, IL, USA 60611-3658

## Availability of Companion Documents



Elements considered critical for an endoscopy report for esophageal cancer, including a template for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for esophageal cancer to initially stage esophageal or gastroesophageal junction carcinoma and templates for recording findings from endoscopic ultrasonography and endoscopic mucosal resection, can be found in the [original guideline document](http://www.sts.org/publications-resources/guidelines/diagnosis-and-staging-patients-esophageal-cancer "Society of Thoracic Surgeons Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on October 22, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



© 2013 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons

The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Practice Guidelines may be printed or downloaded for individual and personal use only. Guidelines may not be reproduced in any print or electronic publication or offered for sale or distribution in any format without the express written permission of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

