---
title: Use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions.
id: 11294
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Dhar V, Marghalani AA, Crystal YO, Kumar A, Ritwik P, Tulunoglu O, Graham L. Use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions. Pediatr Dent. 2017 Sep-Oct;39(5):E146-E159. [64 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# NEATS Assessment

## Disclosure of Guideline Funding Source

- Yes

## Disclosure and Management of Financial Conflict of Interests

- 2

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Multidisciplinary Group

- No

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Methodologist Involvement

- Yes

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Patient and Public Perspectives

- 2

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Search Strategy

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Study Selection

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Synthesis of Evidence

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Grading the Quality or Strength of Evidence

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Benefits and Harms of Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Evidence Summary Supporting Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Rating the Strength of Recommendations

- 5

## Specific and Unambiguous Articulation of Recommendations

- 5

## External Review

- 3

## Updating

- 5

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the quality of the evidence ( **High** , **Moderate** , **Low** , **Very Low** ) and the strength of recommendations ( **Strong** , **Conditional** ) are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Question 1 


In vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions requiring pulp therapy, is one particular therapy (indirect pulp therapy [IPT], direct pulp cap [DPC], pulpotomy) more successful than others? 


####  Recommendation 


The panel was unable to make a recommendation on superiority of any particular type of vital pulp therapy owing to lack of studies directly comparing these interventions. 


###  Question 2 


In vital primary teeth treated with indirect pulp treatment due to deep caries lesions, does the choice of medicament affect success? 


####  Recommendation 


The panel found that the success of IPT in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions was independent of the type of medicament used, and therefore recommends that clinicians choose the medicament based on individual preferences. ( **Conditional recommendation, moderate-quality evidence [24 months], Low quality evidence [48 months]** ) 


###  Question 3 


In vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with direct pulp cap due to pulp exposure (one mm or less) encountered during carious dentin removal, does the choice of medicament affect success? 


####  Recommendation 


The panel found that in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with DPC due to pulp exposure (one mm or less) encountered during caries removal, the success of DPC was independent of the type of medicament (dentin bonding agents, mineral trioxide aggregate [MTA], and formocresol), and therefore recommends that clinicians choose the medicament based on individual preferences. ( **Conditional recommendation, very-low quality evidence** ) 


###  Question 4 


In vital primary teeth with deep caries treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during caries removal, does the choice of medicament or technique affect success? 


####  Recommendations 


  * The panel recommends the use of MTA in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends the use of formocresol in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends the use of ferric sulfate (FS) in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends the use of lasers in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends the use of sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends the use of tricalcium silicate in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence** ) 
  * The panel recommends against the use of calcium hydroxide in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during carious dentin removal. ( **Conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence** ) 




###  Definitions 


####  Quality of Evidence Grades 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence Grades">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Grade
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     High
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    The panel is very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Moderate
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    The panel is moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Low
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    The panel's confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Very Low
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    The panel has very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="2" valign="top">
    <span class="Note">
     Reprinted with permission from the GRADE Handbook: Handbook for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE approach. Update October 2013.
    </span>
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  Implications of Strong and Conditional Recommendations for Different Users of Guidelines 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Implications of Strong and Conditional Recommendations for Different Users of Guidelines">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Implications
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Strong Recommendation
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Conditional Recommendation
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     For Patients
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Most individuals in this situation would want the recommended course of action, and only a small proportion would not.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    The majority of individuals in this situation would want the suggested course of action, but many would not.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     For Clinicians
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Most individuals should receive the recommended course of action. Adherence to this recommendation according to the guideline could be used as a quality criterion or performance indicator. Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions consistent with their values and preferences.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Recognize that different choices will be appropriate for patients and that you must help each patient arrive at a management decision consistent with his or her values and preferences. Decision aids may well be useful helping individuals making decisions consistent with their values and preferences. Clinicians should expect to spend more time with patients when working towards a decision.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     For Policy Makers
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    The recommendation can be adapted as policy in most situations including for the use as performance indicators.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Policymaking will require substantial debates and involvement of many stakeholders. Policies are also more likely to vary between regions. Performance indicators would have to focus on the fact that adequate deliberation about the management options has taken place.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="3" valign="top">
    <span class="Note">
     Reprinted with permission from the GRADE Handbook: Handbook for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE approach. Update October 2013.
    </span>
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Deep caries lesions

## Guideline Category

- Assessment of Therapeutic Effectiveness
- Management
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Dentistry
- Pediatrics

## Intended Users

- Allied Health Personnel
- Dentists
- Public Health Departments
- Students

## Guideline Objective(s)



To aid clinicians in optimizing patient care when choosing vital pulp therapies to treat children with deep caries lesions in vital primary teeth

**Note** : The current recommendation does not cover non-vital pulp therapies, pulp therapy for immature permanent teeth, or pulp therapy for primary teeth with traumatic injuries.

## Target Population



Children and adolescents with deep caries lesions in vital primary teeth

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Indirect pulp treatment (IPT) using medicament (calcium hydroxide, bonding agents) 
  2. Direct pulp capping (DPC) using medicament (calcium hydroxide, dentin bonding agents, mineral trioxide aggregate [MTA], and formocresol) 
  3. Pulpotomy using: 
    * MTA 
    * Formocresol 
    * Ferric sulfate (FS) 
    * Lasers 
    * Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) 
    * Tricalcium silicate 



**Note** : The use of calcium hydroxide was considered but not recommended in vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy. 

## Major Outcomes Considered



Overall success (combined clinical and radiographic) of vital pulp therapy

# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases
- Searches of Unpublished Data

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

 **Methods**

Evidence from "Primary Tooth Vital Pulp Therapy: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" is the basis for the current guideline's recommendations.

**Search Strategy and Evidence Inclusion Criteria**

Since it was decided a priori to use the aforementioned systematic review, multiple literature searches were conducted in PubMed®/MEDLINE, EMBASE®, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and trial databases to identify randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews addressing peripheral issues not covered by the review, such as patient preferences and impact of cost. The search strategy was updated by one of the authors. Title and abstract and, when warranted, full-text of studies were reviewed in duplicate by workgroup members. See the Appendix in the original guideline document for the search strategy.

Refer to the systematic review (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field) for additional information on search strategy and inclusion and exclusion criteria.

## Number of Source Documents



Forty-one articles were included in the meta-analysis.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Quality of Evidence Grades</span></strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence Grades">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Grade</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Definition</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row"><strong>High</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">The panel is very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Moderate</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">The panel is moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Low</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">The panel's confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Very Low</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">The panel has very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" colspan="2"><span class="Note">Reprinted with permission from the GRADE Handbook: Handbook for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE approach. Update October 2013.</span></td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Meta-Analysis
- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The panel evaluated and voted on the level of certainty of the evidence using the Grades of Recommendation Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. The GRADE approach recognizes the evidence quality (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field) and certainty as high, moderate, low, and very low, based on serious or very serious issues including risk of bias, imprecision, inconsistency, indirectness of evidence, and publication bias.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **Workgroup and Stakeholders**

In December, 2016, the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) Board of Trustees approved a panel nominated by the Evidence-Based Dentistry Committee to develop a new evidence-based clinical practice guideline on vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions. The panel consisted of pediatric dentists in public and private practice involved in research and education; the stakeholders consisted of authors of the systematic review in addition to representatives from general dentistry, governmental and non-governmental agencies, and international and specialty dental organizations. 

**Clinical Questions Addressed**

The panel members used the Population, Intervention, Control, and Outcome (PICO) formulation to develop the following clinical questions that will aid clinicians in the use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions. 

  1. In vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions requiring pulp therapy, is one particular therapy (indirect pulp treatment, direct pulp cap, pulpotomy) more successful* than others? 
  2. In vital primary teeth treated with indirect pulp treatment due to deep caries lesions, does the choice of medicament affect success*? 
  3. In vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with direct pulp cap due to pulp exposure (one mm or less) encountered during carious dentin removal, does the choice of medicament affect success*? 
  4. In vital primary teeth with deep caries lesions treated with pulpotomy due to pulp exposure during caries removal, does the choice of medicament or technique affect success*? 



*Success was defined as overall success simultaneously observed both clinically and radiographically.

**Formulation of the Recommendation**

To formulate the recommendations, the panel used an evidence-to-decision framework including domains such as priority of the problem, certainty in the evidence, balance between desirable and undesirable consequences, and patients' values and preferences. The strength of a recommendation was assessed to be either strong or conditional, which presents different implications for patients, clinicians, and policy makers (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field). 

The guidelines were formulated via teleconferences and online forum discussion with members of the workgroup. The panel members discussed all recommendations and issues surrounding the topic under review, and all significant topics such as recommendations were voted upon anonymously.

**Understanding the Recommendations**

A strong recommendation implies in most situations that clinicians should follow the suggested intervention. A conditional recommendation indicates that while the clinician may want to follow the suggested intervention, the panel recognizes that different choices may be appropriate for individual patients. 

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



**Implications of Strong and Conditional Recommendations for Different Users of Guidelines**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Implications
</th>  
<th>

Strong Recommendation
</th>  
<th>

Conditional Recommendation
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**For Patients**
</th>  
<td>

Most individuals in this situation would want the recommended course of action, and only a small proportion would not.
</td>  
<td>

The majority of individuals in this situation would want the suggested course of action, but many would not.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**For Clinicians**
</th>  
<td>

Most individuals should receive the recommended course of action. Adherence to this recommendation according to the guideline could be used as a quality criterion or performance indicator. Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions consistent with their values and preferences.
</td>  
<td>

Recognize that different choices will be appropriate for patients and that you must help each patient arrive at a management decision consistent with his or her values and preferences. Decision aids may well be useful helping individuals making decisions consistent with their values and preferences. Clinicians should expect to spend more time with patients when working towards a decision.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**For Policy Makers**
</th>  
<td>

The recommendation can be adapted as policy in most situations including for the use as performance indicators.
</td>  
<td>

Policymaking will require substantial debates and involvement of many stakeholders. Policies are also more likely to vary between regions. Performance indicators would have to focus on the fact that adequate deliberation about the management options has taken place.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Reprinted with permission from the GRADE Handbook: Handbook for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE approach. Update October 2013.
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



**Cost-effectiveness of Recommendation**

Cost-effectiveness of a treatment is based on initial and possible retreatment costs. Such a cost-analysis for therapies with proven health benefits and minimal adverse effects is an important consideration for clinicians, patients, and third-party payors. This is especially important when different procedures with similar outcomes are available to treat a specific condition like in the case of vital pulp therapies. A research brief covering claims data for all children with private dental insurance lists vital pulpotomy, in primary or permanent teeth, as one of top 25 most common procedures performed in children with private dental benefits. For ages one through six years, the spending is estimated to be $257, ranging from $160 for children in the lowest quartile of spending to $996 among children in the highest quartile of spending. Considering the number of pulp therapies performed on a population level, cost-effective treatment is a public health issue. However, very limited data exist on cost-effectiveness of various pulp therapies in the primary dentition. The most expensive pulp treatments and modalities with regards to initial costs are mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) and laser. Interestingly, a German study using the Markov model followed the first permanent molar with vital asymptomatic exposed pulp treated with direct pulp cap (DPC) using MTA or calcium hydroxide over the lifetime of a 20 year old patient and reported that MTA was more cost-effective than calcium hydroxide despite higher initial treatment costs because expensive retreatments were avoided. 

Refer to the original guideline document for additional information.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



 **External Stakeholders**

External and internal stakeholders reviewed the document periodically during the process of development of the guideline. Stakeholders also participated in anonymous surveys to determine the scope and outcomes of the guideline. All stakeholder comments were considered and addressed in the panel meetings. It is expected that the publication and dissemination of the guideline will generate additional dialogue, comments, and feedback from professional, academic, and community stakeholders

**Review and Feedback Integration**

This guideline was continuously reviewed by external and internal stakeholders from the beginning of the process until the formulation of the guidelines. Stakeholders were invited to take part in anonymous surveys to determine the scope and outcomes of the guideline. Comment was also sought on the draft guideline. All stakeholder comments were addressed and acted upon as appropriate per group deliberation.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



Evidence from "Primary Tooth Vital Pulp Therapy: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" is the basis for the current guideline's recommendations.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions

## Potential Harms



The panel did not find sufficient evidence on adverse events related to medicaments used for indirect pulp therapy (IPT), direct pulp cap (DPC), and pulpotomy that could influence the quality of evidence. However, the panel recognizes that there may still be parental concerns regarding formocresol toxicity and discolorations associated with MTA and recommends that the clinicians should explain the evidence to parents and make decisions based on individual preferences. The panel encourages providers to closely monitor any updates from the CDC on _Mycobacterium. abscessus_ infection related to pulpotomy procedures for its future implications and possible impact on the evidence.

Refer to "Potential Adverse Effects" in the original document for additional information.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



Weakness of this guideline are inherent to the limitations found in the systematic review upon which this guideline is based. Limitations include failure to review non-English language studies other than those in Spanish or Portuguese, and that the recommendations are based on combined data from studies of differing risks of bias.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



This guideline, the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry's (AAPD's) first evidence-based guideline on pulp therapy, is published in both the journal _Pediatric Dentistry_ and the AAPD's Reference Manual. By meeting the standards of the National Academy of Medicine (formerly known as the Institute of Medicine) regarding the production of clinical practice guidelines, these recommendations will be submitted to the National Guidelines Clearinghouse ™ (NGC), a database of evidence-based clinical practice guidelines and related documents maintained as a public resource by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). Inclusion in the NGC guarantees the guidelines will be accessible and disseminated to private and public payors, policy makers, and the public. Additionally, AAPD members will be notified of the new guidelines via social media, newsletters, and presentations. The guidelines are available as an open access publication on the AAPD's Web site. Patient education materials are being developed and will be offered in the AAPD's online bookstore. 

Practitioners seeking additional support implementing these guidelines are referred to the following resources: 

  * Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth, Chapter 13, McDonald and Avery's Dentistry for the Child and Adolescent, 10th edition. 
  * Pulp Therapy for the Primary Dentition, Chapter 22, Pediatric Dentistry Infancy through Adolescence, 5th edition. 
  * Pediatric Endodontics, Chapter 26, Cohen's Pathways of the Pulp, 11th edition. 
  * Endodontics: Colleagues for Excellence. [www.aae.org/colleagues](http://www.aae.org/colleagues "American Association of Endodontists Web site")
  * Preserving Pulp Vitality, Chapter 4, The Principles of Endodontics. 
  * Pediatric Endodontics: Current Concepts in Pulp Therapy for Primary and Young Permanent Teeth. 



## Implementation Tools

- Patient Resources
- Resources

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Dhar V, Marghalani AA, Crystal YO, Kumar A, Ritwik P, Tulunoglu O, Graham L. Use of vital pulp therapies in primary teeth with deep caries lesions. Pediatr Dent. 2017 Sep-Oct;39(5):E146-E159. [64 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2017 Sep-Oct

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



The guideline was funded by the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, a dental specialty organization of over 10,000 members.

## Guideline Committee



Vital Pulp Therapy Workgroup

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Workgroup Members_ : Vineet Dhar, BDS, MDS, PhD ( _Vital Pulp Therapy Workgroup Chair_ ), clinical associate professor and chief, Division of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Md., USA; Abdullah A. Marghalani, BDS, MSD, DrPH, pediatric dental fellow, Division of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Md., USA; Yasmi O. Crystal, DMD, MSc, FAAPD, clinical associate professor of pediatric dentistry, NYU College of Dentistry, New York, N.Y., USA, and pediatric dentist in private practice, New Jersey and New York City, N.Y., USA; Ashok Kumar, DDS, MS, clinical associate professor of pediatric dentistry, The Ohio State University College of Dentistry, and director of Dental Clinic Operations, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA; Priyanshi Ritwik, DDS, MS, associate professor, Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Louisiana State University School of Dentistry New Orleans, La., USA; Ozlem Tulunoglu, DDS, PhD, full-time faculty, Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Case Western Reserve University, School of Dental Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; Laurel Graham, MLS, senior evidence-based dentistry manager, American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Chicago, Ill., USA 

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



**Declaration of Interests**

Drs. Dhar, Crystal, and Kumar serve on the editorial board of _Pediatric Dentistry_. Drs. Dhar and Marghalani are ad hoc reviewers for _Pediatric Dentistry_.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) Web site](http://www.aapd.org/media/Policies_Guidelines/G_VPT.pdf "American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry \(AAPD\) Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * Coll JA, Seale NS, Vargas K, Marghalani AA, Shamali SA, Graham L. Primary tooth vital pulp therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatric Dentistry. Jan/Feb 2017:39(1):16-123. Available for purchase from the [IngentaConnect Web site](http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/aapd/pd/2017/00000039/00000001/art00002;jsessionid=lkpivtckoa3p.x-ic-live-02 "IngentaConnect Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



Pamphlets for patients are available for purchase from the [American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) store](http://store.aapd.org/index.php/patient-education.html?limit=24 "American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry \(AAPD\) store").

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 6, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 16, 2018.

This NEATS assessment was completed by ECRI Institute on January 10, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 16, 2018.

## Copyright Statement



This summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

