---
id: 10588
permalink: /:collection/10588
---

# General

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Chan D, Downing D, Keough CE, Saad WA, Annamalai G, d'Othee BJ, Ganguli S, Itkin M, Kalva SP, Khan AA, Krishnamurthy V, Nikolic B, Owens CA, Postoak D, Roberts AC, Rose SC, Sacks D, Siddiqi NH, Swan TL, Thornton RH, Towbin R, Wallace MJ, Walker TG, Wojak JC, Wardrope RR, Cardella JF, Society of Interventional Radiology, Association of periOperative Registered Nurses. Joint practice guideline for sterile technique during vascular and interventional radiology procedures: from the Society of Interventional Radiology, Association of periOperative Registered Nurses, and Association for Radiologic and Imaging Nursing, for the Society of Interventional Radiology Standards of Practice Committee, and Endorsed by the Cardiovascular Interventional Radiological Society of Europe and the Canadian Interventional Radiology Association. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2012 Dec;23(12):1603-12. [57 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23177106)

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Chan D, Downing D, Keough CE, Saad WA, Annamalai G, d'Othee BJ, Ganguli S, Itkin M, Kalva SP, Khan AA, Krishnamurthy V, Nikolic B, Owens CA, Postoak D, Roberts AC, Rose SC, Sacks D, Siddiqi NH, Swan TL, Thornton RH, Towbin R, Wallace MJ, Walker TG, Wojak JC, Wardrope RR, Cardella JF, Society of Interventional Radiology, Association of periOperative Registered Nurses. Joint practice guideline for sterile technique during vascular and interventional radiology procedures: from the Society of Interventional Radiology, Association of periOperative Registered Nurses, and Association for Radiologic and Imaging Nursing, for the Society of Interventional Radiology Standards of Practice Committee, and Endorsed by the Cardiovascular Interventional Radiological Society of Europe and the Canadian Interventional Radiology Association. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2012 Dec;23(12):1603-12. [57 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23177106)

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer

The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

