---
title: "Best evidence statement (BESt). Postpartum mother accompaniment during neonatal transport."
id: 9918
permalink: /:collection/9918
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Best evidence statement (BESt). Postpartum mother accompaniment during neonatal transport.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Postpartum mother accompaniment during neonatal transport. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Apr 15. 4 p. [4 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the document.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation on whether or not accompaniment by the postpartum mother during ground or air medical transport has an effect on maternal physical or mental health and safety. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Diseases and conditions requiring neonate medical transport from one hospital to another

## Guideline Category

- Management

## Clinical Specialty

- Emergency Medicine
- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Obstetrics and Gynecology
- Pediatrics

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Emergency Medical Technicians/Paramedics
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To evaluate, among postpartum mothers whose neonates require transport, if accompaniment by the postpartum mother during ground or air medical transport has an effect on the mother's overall health (e.g., physical, mental) and safety

## Target Population



Mothers who have given birth in the last four weeks whose neonates require ground or air medical transport from one hospital to another

## Interventions and Practices Considered



Accompaniment by the postpartum mother during ground or air medical transportation of neonate

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Physical and mental health of mother 
  * Safety of mother 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Search Strategy**

  * **Databases** : Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), Cochrane, PubMed, and Google Scholar 
  * **Search Terms** : Post-partum early discharge and complications, family/parent on transport, parental support, safety on transport, neonatal transport, pediatric transport, safe travel and postpartum safety maternal distress with the ill newborn, parental grief with newborn transport and neonatal ICU 
  * **Limits, Filters, Search Dates** : English, human, no date specifications 
  * **Date Last Searched** : August, 2012 



## Number of Source Documents



Four descriptive studies were found related to parent and transport team feedback surrounding urgent pediatric transport, however none of the identified studies were specific to neonatal transport or address the health and safety of the parent.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Table of Evidence Levels</strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table of Evidence Levels">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Quality Level</th>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Definition</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">1a&dagger; or 1b&dagger;</td>
            <td valign="top">Systematic review, meta-analysis, or meta-synthesis of multiple studies</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">2a or 2b </td>
            <td valign="top">Best study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">3a or 3b</td>
            <td valign="top">Fair study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">4a or 4b </td>
            <td valign="top">Weak study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5a or 5b </td>
            <td valign="top">General review, expert opinion, case report, consensus report, or guideline</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5</td>
            <td valign="top">Local Consensus</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p class="Note">&dagger;a = good quality study; b = lesser quality study</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Table of Language and Definitions for Recommendation Strength**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Language for Strength
</th>  
<th>

Definition
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



It is strongly recommended that…

It is strongly recommended that… not…


</td>  
<td>



When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is high support that benefits clearly outweigh risks and burdens (or visa-versa for negative recommendations).


</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



It is recommended that…

It is recommended that… not…


</td>  
<td>



When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is moderate support that benefits are closely balanced with risks and burdens.


</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation…


</td> </tr> </table>

**Note** : See the original guideline document for the dimensions used for judging the strength of the recommendation.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This Best Evidence Statement has been reviewed against quality criteria by two independent reviewers from the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Evidence Collaboration.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



Current evidence was found to be insufficient to make a recommendation.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Use of consistent criteria to determine appropriateness for postpartum mother transport accompaniment 
  * Use of standardized process to evaluate the physical and mental capabilities of the mother and context for safe postpartum accompaniment 



## Potential Harms


  * While most of the parents expressed they preferred to accompany the child on transport, transport personnel articulated concerns related to parent accompaniment such as interference in the care of the child, gaining the child's cooperation in the parent's presence, and parental apprehension when observing care interventions. 
  * It was noted through informal dialogue with other pediatric transport providers across the country that they also allowed transport team members to decide the appropriateness of each postpartum accompaniment. Individual decision making may be biased by personal opinion or convenience, resulting in unnecessary variation, rather than solely evaluated on the mothers physical and mental status. 



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This Best Evidence Statement addresses only key points of care for the target population; it is not intended to be a comprehensive practice guideline. These recommendations result from review of literature and practices current at the time of their formulation. This Best Evidence Statement does not preclude using care modalities proven efficacious in studies published subsequent to the current revision of this document. This document is not intended to impose standards of care preventing selective variances from the recommendations to meet the specific and unique requirements of individual patients. Adherence to this Statement is voluntary. The clinician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient must make the ultimate judgment regarding the priority of any specific procedure.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



 **Applicability Issues**

Since there is no recommendation, the plan to address the question is to conduct a research survey of Neonatal/Pediatric Transport Teams nationally in order to determine current beliefs and practice. Survey questions will include whether or not site transport personnel: feel that parents should be allowed to accompany the child on transport, vary their practice in relation to the age of the child, foresee any parent related problems on accompaniment, have experienced safety situations during parent accompaniment, routinely discourage parent accompaniment during either ground or air transport, and have defined standards regarding accompaniment. Survey results will be taken to the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Transport Team for discussion. The current guideline will be revised once local consensus is achieved for use within CCHMC Transport Team Services.

## Implementation Tools

- Audit Criteria/Indicators

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Safety

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Postpartum mother accompaniment during neonatal transport. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Apr 15. 4 p. [4 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Apr 15

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center - Hospital/Medical Center

## Source(s) of Funding



No external funding was received for development of this Best Evidence Statement (BESt).

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Team Leader/Author_ : Linda Waechter RN, BSN Transport Nurse

_Team Members/Co-Authors_ : Greg Schano RN, MSN, MBA Manager of Transport Services

_Support/Consultant_ : Patti Besuner RN, MN Evidence-based Practice Mentor

_Ad Hoc/Content Reviewers_ : Paul Beckman, Staff Chaplain, Pastoral Care

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Conflicts of interest were declared for each team member. No financial or intellectual conflicts of interest were found.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the document.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Judging the strength of a recommendation. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Jan. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/judgingrecommendationstrength%20717.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 
  * Grading a body of evidence to answer a clinical question. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 1 p. 
  * Table of evidence levels. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Feb 29. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/table%20of%20evidence%20levels%20-%20legend.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 



In addition, suggested process or outcome measures are available in the [original guideline document](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on September 6, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original full-text guideline, which is subject to the following copyright restrictions:

Copies of this Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Best Evidence Statement (BESt) are available online and may be distributed by any organization for the global purpose of improving child health outcomes. Examples of approved uses of the BESt include the following:

  * Copies may be provided to anyone involved in the organization's process for developing and implementing evidence based care; 
  * Hyperlinks to the CCHMC website may be placed on the organization's website; 
  * The BESt may be adopted or adapted for use within the organization, provided that CCHMC receives appropriate attribution on all written or electronic documents; and 
  * Copies may be provided to patients and the clinicians who manage their care. 



Notification of CCHMC at [EBDMInfo@cchmc.org](mailto:EBDMInfo@cchmc.org) for any BESt adopted, adapted, implemented or hyperlinked by the organization is appreciated.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

