---
title: Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis. Section 3. Management and treatment with phototherapy and systemic agents.
id: 10505
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis. Section 3. Management and treatment with phototherapy and systemic agents.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Sidbury R, Davis DM, Cohen DE, Cordoro KM, Berger TG, Bergman JN, Chamlin SL, Cooper KD, Feldman SR, Hanifin JM, Krol A, Margolis DJ, Paller AS, Schwarzenberger K, Silverman RA, Simpson EL, Tom WL, Williams HC, Elmets CA, Block J, Harrod CG, Begolka WS, Eichenfield LF. Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis. Section 3. Management and treatment with phototherapy and systemic agents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Aug;71(2):327-49. [74 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=24813298)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Hanifin JM, Cooper KD, Ho VC, Kang S, Krafchik BR, Margolis DJ, Schachner LA, Sidbury R, Whitmore SE, Sieck CK, Van Voorhees AS. Guidelines of care for atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004 Mar;50(3):391-404. [212 references]

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Level of evidence (I-III) and strength of recommendations (A-C) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


**Note from the National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC)** : Recommendations on atopic dermatitis (AD) treatment and management are subdivided into 4 sections given the significant breadth of the topic. This document is the third of 4 publications in the series and discusses the management of AD via phototherapy and systemic agents, including immunomodulators, antimicrobials, and antihistamines. 


####  Recommendations for the Use of Phototherapy 


  * Phototherapy is a second-line treatment, after failure of first-line treatment (emollients, topical steroids, and topical calcineurin inhibitors). 
  * Phototherapy can be used as maintenance therapy in patients with chronic disease. 
  * Phototherapy treatment of all forms should be under the guidance and ongoing supervision of a physician knowledgeable in phototherapy techniques. 
  * The light modality chosen should be guided by factors such as availability, cost, patient skin type, skin cancer history, and patient use of photosensitizing medications. 
  * The dosing and scheduling of light should be based on minimal erythema dose and/or Fitzpatrick skin type. 
  * Home phototherapy under the direction of a physician may be considered for patients who are unable to receive phototherapy in an office setting. 




####  Strength of Recommendations for the Management and Treatment of AD with Phototherapy and Systemic Agents 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Strength of Recommendations for the Management and Treatment of AD with Phototherapy and Systemic Agents">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Recommendation
   </th>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
    Strength of Recommendation
   </th>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
    Level of Evidence
   </th>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
    References
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Phototherapy (all forms)
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Morison, Parrish, &amp; Fitzpatrick, 1978; Meduri et al., 2007; Rombold et al., 2008; Clayton et al., 2007; Jekler &amp; Larko, 1988; Grundmann-Kollmann et al., 1999; Tay, Morelli, &amp; Weston, 1996; Menter et al., 2010; Morison et al., 1998; Uetsu &amp; Horio, 2003; Yoshiike et al., 1993; Atherton et al., 1988; Jury et al., 2006; Tzung et al., 2006
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Home phototherapy
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    III
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Koek et al., 2009
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Cyclosporine
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    I-II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Haeck et al., 2011; Schmitt et al., 2010; Hoare, Li Wan Po, &amp; Williams, 2000; Allen, 1991; van Joost et al., 1994; Czech et al., 2000; Zurbriggen et al., 1999; Schmitt, Schmitt, &amp; Meurer, 2007; Menter et al., 2009; Harper et al., 2000
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Azathioprine (AZA)
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Schram et al., 2011; Meggitt, Gray &amp; Reynolds, 2006; Berth-Jones et al., 2002; Perrett et al., 2008; el-Azhary et al., 2009; Caufield &amp; Tom, 2013; Evans et al., 2001; Murphy &amp; Atherton, 2002; Hon et al., 2009
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Methotrexate (MTX)
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Schram et al., 2011; Menter et al., 2009; Weatherhead et al., 2007; Lyakhovitsky et al., 2010; Kalb et al., 2009; El-Khalawany et al., 2013; Dadlani &amp; Orlow, 2005
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    III
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Haeck et al., 2011; Murray &amp; Cohen, 2007; Heller et al., 2007
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Interferon gamma (IFN-G)
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Hanifin et al., 1993; Jang et al., 2000
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Systemic steroids
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Ring et al., 2012; Schmitt et al., 2010
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="4" valign="top">
    Systemic antibiotics
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      None, if noninfected atopic dermatitis (AD)
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Boguniewicz et al., 2001; Bath-Hextall et al., 2010; Ewing et al., 1998; Weinberg et al., 1992
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      For infected AD
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    A
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Boguniewicz et al., 2001; Bath-Hextall et al., 2010; Ewing et al., 1998; Weinberg et al., 1992
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Concurrent topical steroid treatment during oral antibiotic course
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    III
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    No clinical trials
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Systemic antivirals for eczema herpeticum
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Aronson et al., 2011
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="4" valign="top">
    Against use of systemic antihistamines
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Sedating
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    III
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Diepgen, 2002; Sher et al., 2012; Klein &amp; Clark, 1999; Hannuksela et al., 1993; Epstein &amp; Pinski, 1964
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Nonsedating
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    A
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    II
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Diepgen, 2002; Sher et al., 2012; Klein &amp; Clark, 1999; Hannuksela et al., 1993; Epstein &amp; Pinski, 1964
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  Recommendations for the Use of Systemic Immunomodulatory Agents 


  * Systemic immunomodulatory agents are indicated for the subset of adult and pediatric patients in whom optimized topical regimens and/or phototherapy do not adequately control the signs and symptoms of disease. 
  * Systemic immunomodulatory agents are indicated when the patient's skin disease has significant negative physical, emotional, or social impact. 
  * All immunomodulatory agents should be adjusted to the minimal effective dose once response is attained and sustained. Adjunctive therapies should be continued to use the lowest dose and duration of systemic agent possible. 
  * Insufficient data exist to firmly recommend optimal dosing, duration of therapy, and precise monitoring protocols for any systemic immunomodulating medication. 
  * Treatment decisions should be based on each individual patient's AD status (current and historical), comorbidities, and preferences. 
  * Cyclosporine is effective and recommended as a treatment option for patients with AD refractory to conventional topical treatment. 
  * Azathioprine (AZA) is recommended as a systemic agent for the treatment of refractory AD. 
  * Methotrexate (MTX) is recommended as a systemic agent for the treatment of refractory AD. Folate supplementation is recommended during treatment with MTX. 
  * Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) may be considered as an alternative, variably effective therapy for refractory AD. 
  * Interferon gamma (IFN-G) is moderately and variably effective and may be considered as an alternative therapy for refractory AD in adults and children who have not responded to, or have contraindications to the use of, other systemic therapies or phototherapy. 
  * Systemic steroids should be avoided if possible for the treatment of AD. Their use should be exclusively reserved for acute, severe exacerbations and as a short-term bridge therapy to other systemic, steroid-sparing therapy. 




####  Recommendations for the Use of Systemic Antimicrobials 


  * The use of systemic antibiotics in the treatment of noninfected AD is not recommended. 
  * Systemic antibiotics are appropriate and can be recommended for use in patients with clinical evidence of bacterial infections in addition to standard and appropriate treatments for AD disease itself (which may include the concurrent use of topical corticosteroids). 
  * Systemic antiviral agents should be used for the treatment of eczema herpeticum. 




####  Recommendations for the use of Systemic Antihistamines 


  * There is insufficient evidence to recommend the general use of antihistamines as part of the treatment of AD. 
  * Short-term, intermittent use of sedating antihistamines may be beneficial in the setting of sleep loss secondary to itch, but should not be substituted for management of AD with topical therapies. 
  * Nonsedating antihistamines are not recommended as a routine treatment for AD in the absence of urticaria or other atopic conditions such as rhinoconjunctivitis. 




Also refer to the dosing guidelines available in Tables IV, V, VI, and VIII in the original guideline document. 


###  Definitions: 


####  Level of Evidence 


  1. Good-quality patient-oriented evidence (i.e., evidence measuring outcomes that matter to patients: morbidity, mortality, symptom improvement, cost reduction, and quality of life). 
  2. Limited-quality patient-oriented evidence. 
  3. Other evidence, including consensus guidelines, opinion, case studies, or disease-oriented evidence (i.e., evidence measuring intermediate, physiologic, or surrogate end points that may or may not reflect improvements in patient outcomes). 




####  Grade of Recommendation 


  1. Recommendation based on consistent and good-quality patient-oriented evidence. 
  2. Recommendation based on inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence. 
  3. Recommendation based on consensus, opinion, case studies, or disease-oriented evidence. 


## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Atopic dermatitis (AD; atopic eczema)

**Note** : The treatment of other forms of eczematous dermatitis is outside the scope of this document.

## Guideline Category

- Management
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Allergy and Immunology
- Dermatology
- Family Practice
- Internal Medicine
- Pediatrics

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To address the management of pediatric and adult atopic dermatitis (AD; atopic eczema) of all severities

## Target Population



Pediatric and adult patients with atopic dermatitis (AD; atopic eczema)

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Phototherapy 
    * Consideration of dosing and scheduling 
    * Home phototherapy 
  2. Systemic agents 
    * Cyclosporine 
    * Azathioprine (AZA) 
    * Methotrexate (MTX) 
    * Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 
    * Interferon gamma (IFN-G) 
    * Systemic steroids 
    * Systemic antibiotics (infected atopic dermatitis [AD] only) 
    * Systemic antihistamines (not recommended) 
    * Systemic antivirals (eczema herpeticum) 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Disease severity 
  * Morbidity 
  * Mortality 
  * Symptom improvement 
  * Cost 
  * Quality of life 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



An evidence-based model was used and evidence was obtained using a search of the PubMed and the Global Resources for Eczema Trials databases from November 2003 through November 2012 for clinical questions addressed in the previous version of this guideline published in 2004, and 1960 through 2012 for all newly identified clinical questions as determined by the work group to be of importance to clinical care. Searches were prospectively limited to publications in the English language. Medical Subject Headings terms used in various combinations in the literature search included: "atopic dermatitis," "atopic eczema," "systemic agent(s)," "immunomodulatory," "immunosuppressive," "cyclosporine," "azathioprine," "mycophenolate mofetil," "methotrexate," "interferon gamma," "prednisone," "prednisolone," "biologics," "TNF-alpha inhibitor," "etanercept," "infliximab," "leukotriene inhibitor," "omalizumab," "oral tacrolimus," "oral pimecrolimus," "ascomycin," "thymopentin/TP-5," "intravenous immunoglobulin," "theophylline," "papaverine," "phototherapy," "photochemotherapy," "ultraviolet," "laser," "systemic/oral antimicrobial," "systemic/oral antibiotic," "antihistamines," "cetirizine," "fexofenadine," "loratadine," "terfenadine," "olopatadine," "clemastine,""leukotriene," "zafirlukast," and "montelukast."

A total of 1063 abstracts were initially assessed for possible inclusion. After removal of duplicate data, 185 were retained for final review based on relevancy and the highest level of available evidence for the outlined clinical questions.

The American Academy of Dermatology's (AAD's) prior published guidelines on atopic dermatitis (AD) were evaluated, as were other current published guidelines on atopic dermatitis.

## Number of Source Documents



185 publications were retained for final review

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>Evidence was graded using a 3-point scale based on the quality of study methodology as follows:</p>
<ol style="list-style-type: upper-roman;">
    <li>Good-quality patient-oriented evidence (i.e., evidence measuring outcomes that matter to patients: morbidity, mortality, symptom improvement, cost reduction, and quality of life). </li>
    <li>Limited-quality patient-oriented evidence. </li>
    <li>Other evidence, including consensus guidelines, opinion, case studies, or disease-oriented evidence (i.e., evidence measuring intermediate, physiologic, or surrogate end points that may or may not reflect improvements in patient outcomes). </li>
</ol></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Evidence tables were generated for these studies and used by the work group in developing recommendations.

The available evidence was evaluated using a unified system called the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy (SORT) developed by editors of the US family medicine and primary care journals (i.e., _American Family Physician, Family Medicine, Journal of Family Practice_ , and _BMJ USA_ ). Evidence was graded using a 3-point scale based on the quality of study methodology (e.g., randomized control trial [RCT], case-control, prospective/retrospective cohort, case series), and the overall focus of the study (i.e., diagnosis, treatment/prevention/screening, or prognosis). (See the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field.)

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



A work group of recognized atopic dermatitis (AD) experts was convened to determine the audience and scope of the guideline, and to identify important clinical questions in the use of topical therapies for AD management.

Clinical questions used to structure the evidence review for the treatment of AD with phototherapy and systemic agents:

  * Which immunomodulatory agents are efficacious and safe for the treatment of AD? 
    * Cyclosporin A (CSA) 
    * Azathioprine (AZA) 
    * Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 
    * Methotrexate (MTX) 
    * Interferon gamma (IFN-G) 
    * Systemic steroids 
    * Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors (etanercept, infliximab) 
    * Leukotriene inhibitors 
    * Omalizumab 
    * Oral calcineurin inhibitors 
    * Other (e.g., thymopentin [TP]/TP-5, intravenous immunoglobulin, theophylline, papaverine) 
  * What is the efficacy of systemic antimicrobials and systemic antihistamines for the treatment of AD? 
  * What is the optimal dose, frequency of use, adverse effects, and efficacy of phototherapy and photochemotherapy for the treatment of AD? 



Clinical recommendations were developed based on the best available evidence tabled in the guideline. In those situations where documented evidence-based data were not available, expert opinion was used to generate clinical recommendations.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



Clinical recommendations were developed based on the best available evidence. These are ranked as follows:

  1. Recommendation based on consistent and good-quality patient-oriented evidence. 
  2. Recommendation based on inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence. 
  3. Recommendation based on consensus, opinion, case studies, or disease-oriented evidence. 



## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This guideline has been developed in accordance with the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD)/AAD Association _Administrative Regulations for Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines_ (version approved May 2010), which includes the opportunity for review and comment by the entire AAD membership and final review and approval by the AAD Board of Directors.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## References Supporting the Recommendations

- Allen B. A multicenter double-blind placebo controlled crossover to assess the efficacy and safety of cyclosporin A in adult patients with severe refractory atopic dermatitis. Athens (Greece): Royal Society of Medicine Services Ltd; 1991.
- Aronson PL, Yan AC, Mittal MK, Mohamad Z, Shah SS. Delayed acyclovir and outcomes of children hospitalized with eczema herpeticum. Pediatrics. 2011 Dec;128(6):1161-7. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22084327)
- Atherton DJ, Carabott F, Glover MT, Hawk JL. The role of psoralen photochemotherapy (PUVA) in the treatment of severe atopic eczema in adolescents. Br J Dermatol. 1988 Jun;118(6):791-5. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3401414)
- Bath-Hextall FJ, Birnie AJ, Ravenscroft JC, Williams HC. Interventions to reduce Staphylococcus aureus in the management of atopic eczema: an updated Cochrane review. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Jul;163(1):12-26. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20222931)
- Berth-Jones J, Takwale A, Tan E, Barclay G, Agarwal S, Ahmed I, Hotchkiss K, Graham-Brown RA. Azathioprine in severe adult atopic dermatitis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Br J Dermatol. 2002 Aug;147(2):324-30. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12174106)
- Boguniewicz M, Sampson H, Leung SB, Harbeck R, Leung DY. Effects of cefuroxime axetil on Staphylococcus aureus colonization and superantigen production in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Oct;108(4):651-2. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11590398)
- Caufield M, Tom WL. Oral azathioprine for recalcitrant pediatric atopic dermatitis: clinical response and thiopurine monitoring. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013 Jan;68(1):29-35. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22892285)
- Clayton TH, Clark SM, Turner D, Goulden V. The treatment of severe atopic dermatitis in childhood with narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2007 Jan;32(1):28-33. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17305905)
- Czech W, Bräutigam M, Weidinger G, Schöpf E. A body-weight-independent dosing regimen of cyclosporine microemulsion is effective in severe atopic dermatitis and improves the quality of life. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000 Apr;42(4):653-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10727313)
- Dadlani C, Orlow SJ. Treatment of children and adolescents with methotrexate, cyclosporine, and etanercept: review of the dermatologic and rheumatologic literature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005 Feb;52(2):316-40. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15692480)
- Diepgen TL, Early Treatment of the Atopic Child Study Group. Long-term treatment with cetirizine of infants with atopic dermatitis: a multi-country, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial (the ETAC trial) over 18 months. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2002 Aug;13(4):278-86. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12390444)
- el-Azhary RA, Farmer SA, Drage LA, Rogers RS, McEvoy MT, Davis MD, Bridges AG, Gibson LE. Thioguanine nucleotides and thiopurine methyltransferase in immunobullous diseases: optimal levels as adjunctive tools for azathioprine monitoring. Arch Dermatol. 2009 Jun;145(6):644-52. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19528417)
- El-Khalawany MA, Hassan H, Shaaban D, Ghonaim N, Eassa B. Methotrexate versus cyclosporine in the treatment of severe atopic dermatitis in children: a multicenter experience from Egypt. Eur J Pediatr. 2013 Mar;172(3):351-6. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23229188)
- Epstein E, Pinski JB. A blind study. Arch Dermatol. 1964 Apr;89:548-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14107620)
- Evans WE, Hon YY, Bomgaars L, Coutre S, Holdsworth M, Janco R, Kalwinsky D, Keller F, Khatib Z, Margolin J, Murray J, Quinn J, Ravindranath Y, Ritchey K, Roberts W, Rogers ZR, Schiff D, Steuber C, Tucci F, Kornegay N, Krynetski EY, Relling MV. Preponderance of thiopurine S-methyltransferase deficiency and heterozygosity among patients intolerant to mercaptopurine or azathioprine. J Clin Oncol. 2001 Apr 15;19(8):2293-301. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11304783)
- Ewing CI, Ashcroft C, Gibbs AC, Jones GA, Connor PJ, David TJ. Flucloxacillin in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol. 1998 Jun;138(6):1022-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9747366)
- Grundmann-Kollmann M, Behrens S, Podda M, Peter RU, Kaufmann R, Kerscher M. Phototherapy for atopic eczema with narrow-band UVB. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1999 Jun;40(6 Pt 1):995-7. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10365933)
- Haeck IM, Knol MJ, Ten Berge O, van Velsen SG, de BruinWeller MS, BruijnzeelKoomen CA. Enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium versus cyclosporin A as long-term treatment in adult patients with severe atopic dermatitis: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011 Jun;64(6):1074-84. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=21458107)
- Hanifin JM, Schneider LC, Leung DY, Ellis CN, Jaffe HS, Izu AE, Bucalo LR, Hirabayashi SE, Tofte SJ, Cantu-Gonzales G, et al.. Recombinant interferon gamma therapy for atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1993 Feb;28(2 Pt 1):189-97. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8432915)
- Hannuksela M, Kalimo K, Lammintausta K, Mattila T, Turjanmaa K, Varjonen E, Coulie PJ. Dose ranging study: cetirizine in the treatment of atopic dermatitis in adults. Ann Allergy. 1993 Feb;70(2):127-33. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8430920)
- Harper JI, Ahmed I, Barclay G, Lacour M, Hoeger P, Cork MJ, Finlay AY, Wilson NJ, Graham-Brown RA, Sowden JM, Beard AL, Sumner MJ, BerthJones J. Cyclosporin for severe childhood atopic dermatitis: short course versus continuous therapy. Br J Dermatol. 2000 Jan;142(1):52-8. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10651694)
- Heller M, Shin HT, Orlow SJ, Schaffer JV. Mycophenolate mofetil for severe childhood atopic dermatitis: experience in 14 patients. Br J Dermatol. 2007 Jul;157(1):127-32. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17489974)
- Hoare C, Li Wan Po A, Williams H. Systematic review of treatments for atopic eczema. Health Technol Assess. 2000;4(37):1-191. [420 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11134919)
- Hon KL, Ching GK, Leung TF, Chow CM, Lee KK, Ng PC. Efficacy and tolerability at 3 and 6 months following use of azathioprine for recalcitrant atopic dermatitis in children and young adults. J Dermatolog Treat. 2009;20(3):141-5. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=18951236)
- Jang IG, Yang JK, Lee HJ, Yi JY, Kim HO, Kim CW, Kim TY. Clinical improvement and immunohistochemical findings in severe atopic dermatitis treated with interferon gamma. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000 Jun;42(6):1033-40. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10827410)
- Jekler J, Larkö O. UVB phototherapy of atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol. 1988 Dec;119(6):697-705. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3203067)
- Jury CS, McHenry P, Burden AD, Lever R, Bilsland D. Narrowband ultraviolet B (UVB) phototherapy in children. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2006 Mar;31(2):196-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16487089)
- Kalb RE, Strober B, Weinstein G, Lebwohl M. Methotrexate and psoriasis: 2009 National Psoriasis Foundation Consensus Conference. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 May;60(5):824-37. [104 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19389524)
- Klein PA, Clark RA. An evidence-based review of the efficacy of antihistamines in relieving pruritus in atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol. 1999 Dec;135(12):1522-5. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10606058)
- Koek MB, Buskens E, van Weelden H, Steegmans PH, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA, Sigurdsson V. Home versus outpatient ultraviolet B phototherapy for mild to severe psoriasis: pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled non-inferiority trial (PLUTO study). BMJ. 2009;338:b1542. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19423623)
- Lyakhovitsky A, Barzilai A, Heyman R, Baum S, Amichai B, Solomon M, Shpiro D, Trau H. Low-dose methotrexate treatment for moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis in adults. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2010 Jan;24(1):43-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19552716)
- Meduri NB, Vandergriff T, Rasmussen H, Jacobe H. Phototherapy in the management of atopic dermatitis: a systematic review. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2007 Aug;23(4):106-12. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17598862)
- Meggitt SJ, Gray JC, Reynolds NJ. Azathioprine dosed by thiopurine methyltransferase activity for moderate-to-severe atopic eczema: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2006 Mar 11;367(9513):839-46. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16530578)
- Menter A, Korman NJ, Elmets CA, Feldman SR, Gelfand JM, Gordon KB, Gottlieb A, Koo JY, Lebwohl M, Lim HW, Van Voorhees AS, Beutner KR, Bhushan R. Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Section 5. Guidelines of care for the treatment of psoriasis with phototherapy and photochemotherapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 Jan;62(1):114-35. [170 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19811850)
- Menter A, Korman NJ, Elmets CA, Feldman SR, Gelfand JM, Gordon KB, Gottlieb AB, Koo JY, Lebwohl M, Lim HW, Van Voorhees AS, Beutner KR, Bhushan R. Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Section 4. Guidelines of care for the management and treatment of psoriasis with traditional systemic agents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Sep;61(3):451-85. [185 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19493586)
- Morison WL, Baughman RD, Day RM, Forbes PD, Hoenigsmann H, Krueger GG, Lebwohl M, Lew R, Naldi L, Parrish JA, Piepkorn M, Stern RS, Weinstein GD, Whitmore SE. Consensus workshop on the toxic effects of long-term PUVA therapy. Arch Dermatol. 1998 May;134(5):595-8. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9606329)
- Morison WL, Parrish J, Fitzpatrick TB. Oral psoralen photochemotherapy of atopic eczema. Br J Dermatol. 1978 Jan;98(1):25-30. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=626712)
- Murphy LA, Atherton D. A retrospective evaluation of azathioprine in severe childhood atopic eczema, using thiopurine methyltransferase levels to exclude patients at high risk of myelosuppression. Br J Dermatol. 2002 Aug;147(2):308-15. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12174104)
- Murray ML, Cohen JB. Mycophenolate mofetil therapy for moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2007 Jan;32(1):23-7. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17059445)
- Perrett CM, Walker SL, ODonovan P, Warwick J, Harwood CA, Karran P, McGregor JM. Azathioprine treatment photosensitizes human skin to ultraviolet A radiation. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Jul;159(1):198-204. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=18489587)
- Ring J, Alomar A, Bieber T, Deleuran M, FinkWagner A, Gelmetti C, Gieler U, Lipozencic J, Luger T, Oranje AP, Schäfer T, Schwennesen T, Seidenari S, Simon D, Ständer S, Stingl G, Szalai S, Szepietowski JC, Taïeb A, Werfel T, Wollenberg A, Darsow U, European Dermatology Forum, European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology, European Task Force on Atopic Dermatitis, European Federation of Allergy, European Society of Pediatric Dermatology, Global Allergy and Asthma European Network. Guidelines for treatment of atopic eczema (atopic dermatitis) Part II. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Sep;26(9):1176-93. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22813359)
- Rombold S, Lobisch K, Katzer K, Grazziotin TC, Ring J, Eberlein B. Efficacy of UVA1 phototherapy in 230 patients with various skin diseases. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2008 Feb;24(1):19-23. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=18201353)
- Schmitt J, Schäkel K, FölsterHolst R, Bauer A, Oertel R, Augustin M, Aberer W, Luger T, Meurer M. Prednisolone vs. ciclosporin for severe adult eczema. An investigator-initiated double-blind placebo-controlled multicentre trial. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Mar;162(3):661-8. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19863501)
- Schmitt J, Schmitt N, Meurer M. Cyclosporin in the treatment of patients with atopic eczema - a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2007 May;21(5):606-19. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17447974)
- Schram ME, Roekevisch E, Leeflang MM, Bos JD, Schmitt J, Spuls PI. A randomized trial of methotrexate versus azathioprine for severe atopic eczema. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Aug;128(2):353-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=21514637)
- Sher LG, Chang J, Patel IB, Balkrishnan R, Fleischer AB. Relieving the pruritus of atopic dermatitis: a meta-analysis. Acta Derm Venereol. 2012 Sep;92(5):455-61. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22773026)
- Tay YK, Morelli JG, Weston WL. Experience with UVB phototherapy in children. Pediatr Dermatol. 1996 Sep-Oct;13(5):406-9. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8893243)
- Tzung TY, Lin CB, Chen YH, Yang CY. Pimecrolimus and narrowband UVB as monotherapy or combination therapy in children and adolescents with atopic dermatitis. Acta Derm Venereol. 2006;86(1):34-8. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16585987)
- Uetsu N, Horio T. Treatment of persistent severe atopic dermatitis in 113 Japanese patients with oral psoralen photo-chemotherapy. J Dermatol. 2003 Jun;30(6):450-7. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12810992)
- van Joost T, Heule F, Korstanje M, van den Broek MJ, Stenveld HJ, van Vloten WA. Cyclosporin in atopic dermatitis: a multicentre placebo-controlled study. Br J Dermatol. 1994 May;130(5):634-40. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8204472)
- Weatherhead SC, Wahie S, Reynolds NJ, Meggitt SJ. An open-label, dose-ranging study of methotrexate for moderate-to-severe adult atopic eczema. Br J Dermatol. 2007 Feb;156(2):346-51. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17223876)
- Weinberg E, Fourie B, Allmann B, Toerien A. The use of cefadroxil in superinfected atopic dermatitis. Curr Ther Res. 1992;52:671-6.
- Yoshiike T, Aikawa Y, Sindhvananda J, Ogawa H. A proposed guideline for psoralen photochemotherapy (PUVA) with atopic dermatitis: successful therapeutic effect on severe and intractable cases. J Dermatol Sci. 1993 Feb;5(1):50-3. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8485113)
- Zurbriggen B, Wuthrich B, Cachelin AB, Wili PB, Kagi MK. Comparison of two formulations of cyclosporin A in the treatment of severe atopic dermatitis. Aa double-blind, single-centre, cross-over pilot study. Dermatology. 1999;198(1):56-60. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10026403)

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for selected recommendations (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate management and treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) 

## Potential Harms



  * Different forms of phototherapy have distinct risk profiles that the clinician must take into account. Several common adverse effects include: actinic damage, local erythema and tenderness, pruritus, burning, and stinging. Less common consequences of light therapy include: nonmelanoma skin cancer, melanoma (particularly with the use of psoralen plus ultraviolet A [PUVA]), lentigines, photosensitive eruptions (especially polymorphous light eruption), folliculitis, photo-onycholysis, herpes simplex virus (HSV) reactivation, and facial hypertrichosis. Cataract formation is a recognized side effect specific to ultraviolet A (UVA) therapy, whereas the addition of oral psoralen to UVA treatment frequently causes patients to have headaches, nausea, and vomiting, and rarely hepatotoxicity. Oral psoralen also increases a patient's photosensitivity, both cutaneous and ocular, for several hours after ingestion. 
  * Systemic immunomodulatory agents 
    * Potential adverse effects of cyclosporin A (CSA) include: infection, nephrotoxicity, hypertension, tremor, hypertrichosis, headache, gingival hyperplasia, and increased risk of skin cancer and lymphoma. Thus, patients receiving CSA should be monitored for such potential consequences. These adverse effects may occur regardless of daily dosage used, but high-dose groups and low-dose groups have only been compared and measured over short periods of time (up to 12 weeks). Some studies showed higher serum creatinine levels in patients given higher doses initially, but this trended downward over time to match the low-dose counterparts. Caution is advised when using CSA in patients on other systemic medications because of drug interactions. 
    * Nausea, vomiting and other gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms (bloating, anorexia, cramping) are common while on azathioprine (AZA), and may cause patient dissatisfaction and noncompliance. Other side effects that have been variably reported include: headache, hypersensitivity reactions, elevated liver enzymes, and leukopenia. These potential side effects must be taken into consideration in individual patients, with a thorough history, physical examination, and laboratory monitoring performed as deemed appropriate before and during therapy. Although an increased risk of infection, lymphoma, and nonmelanoma skin cancer development has been noted on some patients treated with AZA for other conditions, these patient populations usually require polypharmacy for their disorders, confounding the true relevance to AZA use. 
    * Nausea and other GI symptoms may preclude oral administration of methotrexate (MTX). Severe adverse effects, including bone-marrow suppression and pulmonary fibrosis, can occur. Literature suggests bone-marrow suppression is often reversible upon MTX dose reduction or discontinuation. Risk for skin cancer and lymphoma has been reported, although some cases of lymphoma arising during low-dose treatment have regressed on drug discontinuation. Pulmonary fibrosis may occur with short- or long-term use of the medication, such that patients with pulmonary diseases (e.g., asthma, chronic cough) may not be candidates. The side-effect profile for children on MTX commonly includes GI symptoms such as stomatitis, nausea, and vomiting, but the same potential risks exist in children as they do in adults. 
    * Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is generally well tolerated, with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping being the most common side effects. These GI symptoms may improve if the patient takes the enteric-coated formulation. The development of GI symptoms, along with headaches and fatigue, are not dose dependent and do not tend to negatively impact compliance. Rarely, hematologic (anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) and genitourinary (urgency, frequency, dysuria) symptoms have been reported. There is a theoretical risk of increased susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections while taking MMF, as is clearly observed in patients with organ transplantation. Similar to other immunosuppressive drugs, cutaneous malignancy and lymphoma are potential risks, although difficult to delineate for MMF given many reports involve multidrug therapy. 
    * See Table IX in the original guideline document for a summary of the potential adverse effects, interactions, and contraindications of selected systemic immunomodulatory agents. See also the "Adverse Effects and Monitoring" sections in the original guideline document for additional information. 
  * Constitutional side effects (fatigue, fever, nausea, vomiting, myalgia) have been documented with the use of interferon gamma (IFN-G). 
  * Adverse effects of systemic steroids include: hypertension, glucose intolerance, gastritis, weight gain, decreased bone density, adrenal suppression, and emotional lability. Pediatric patients experience decreased linear growth while on the medication. All potential adverse effects of systemic steroids in adults may also be observed in children. 



# Contraindications

## Contraindications



Table IX in the original guideline document summarizes the contraindications of selected systemic immunomodulatory agents.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



Adherence to these guidelines will not ensure successful treatment in every situation. Furthermore, these guidelines should not be interpreted as setting a standard of care, or be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of care nor exclusive of other methods of care reasonably directed to obtaining the same results. The ultimate judgment regarding the propriety of any specific therapy must be made by the physician and the patient in light of all the circumstances presented by the individual patient, and the known variability and biological behavior of the disease. This guideline reflects the best available data at the time the guideline was prepared. The results of future studies may require revisions to the recommendations in this guideline to reflect new data.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Patient Resources

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Sidbury R, Davis DM, Cohen DE, Cordoro KM, Berger TG, Bergman JN, Chamlin SL, Cooper KD, Feldman SR, Hanifin JM, Krol A, Margolis DJ, Paller AS, Schwarzenberger K, Silverman RA, Simpson EL, Tom WL, Williams HC, Elmets CA, Block J, Harrod CG, Begolka WS, Eichenfield LF. Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis. Section 3. Management and treatment with phototherapy and systemic agents. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Aug;71(2):327-49. [74 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=24813298)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2004 Mar (revised 2014 Aug)

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Academy of Dermatology - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



American Academy of Dermatology operational funds and member volunteer time supported the development of this guideline.

## Guideline Committee



Atopic Dermatitis Work Group

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Work Group Members_ : Robert Sidbury, MD ( _Co-chair_ ); Lawrence F. Eichenfield, MD ( _Co-chair_ ); Dawn M. Davis, MD; David E. Cohen, MD; Kelly M. Cordoro, MD; Timothy G. Berger, MD; James N. Bergman, MD; Sarah L. Chamlin, MD, MSCI; Kevin D. Cooper, MD; Steven R. Feldman, MD, PhD; Jon M. Hanifin, MD; Alfons Krol, MD; David J. Margolis, MD, PhD; Amy S. Paller, MD; Kathryn Schwarzenberger, MD; Robert A. Silverman, MD; Eric L. Simpson, MD; Wynnis L. Tom, MD; Hywel C. Williams, DSc; Craig A. Elmets, MD; Julie Block, BA; Christopher G. Harrod, MS; Wendy Smith Begolka, MBS

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) strives to produce clinical guidelines that reflect the best available evidence supplemented with the judgment of expert clinicians. Significant efforts are taken to minimize the potential for conflicts of interest to influence guideline content. Funding of guideline production by medical or pharmaceutical entities is prohibited, full disclosure is obtained and evaluated for all guideline contributors, and recusal is used to manage identified relationships. The AAD conflict of interest policy summary may be viewed at [www.aad.org](http://www.aad.org "American Academy of Dermatology Web site").

Work group members completed a disclosure of interests that was updated and reviewed for potential relevant conflicts of interest throughout guideline development. If a potential conflict was noted, the work group member recused himself or herself from discussion and drafting of recommendations pertinent to the topic area of the disclosed interest.

The below information represents the authors identified relationships with industry that are relevant to the guideline. Relevant relationships requiring recusal for the drafting of guideline recommendations are noted. The management of conflict of interest for this guideline complies with the Council of Medical Specialty Societies’ Code of Interactions with Companies.

Dr Cohen served on the advisory boards and as a consultant for Ferndale Labs, Galderma, and Onset receiving honoraria; served on the board of directors and as a consultant for Brickell Biotechnology and Topica receiving honoraria, stock, and stock options; and was a consultant for Dermira and Dr Tattoff receiving honoraria and stock options.

Dr Bergman served as a consultant for Pediapharm receiving honoraria.

Dr Chamlin served on the advisory boards for Galderma, Promius, and Valeant receiving honoraria.

Dr Cooper served on the Board of Directors for the American Academy of Dermatology receiving no compensation.

Dr Feldman served on the advisory boards for Amgen, Doak, Galderma, Pfizer, Pharmaderm, Skin Medica, and Stiefel receiving honoraria; was a consultant for Abbott, Astellas, Caremark, Coria, Gerson Lehrman, Kikaku, Leo Pharma, Medicis, Merck, Merz, Novan, Peplin, and Pfizer receiving honoraria, and Celgene, HanAll, and Novartis receiving other financial benefits; was a speaker for Abbott, Amgen, Astellas, Centocor, Dermatology Foundation, Galderma, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pharmaderm, Sanofi-Aventis, Stiefel, and Taro receiving honoraria; served as a stockholder and founder for Causa Technologies and Medical Quality Enhancement Corporation receiving stock; served as an investigator for Abbott, Amgen, Anacor, Astellas, Basilea, Celgene, Centocor, Galderma, Medicis, Skin Medica, and Stiefel receiving grants, and Suncare Research receiving honoraria; and had other relationships with Informa, UptoDate, and Xlibris receiving royalty, and Medscape receiving honoraria. Dr Feldman recused himself for the drafting of guideline recommendations related to phototherapy.

Dr Hanifin served on the advisory board for Chugai Pharma USA receiving honoraria; was a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Elocon Advisory Board, Pfizer, and Valeant Elidel Advisory Board receiving honoraria; and served as an investigator for Asubio, Dohme, and Merck Sharp receiving grants.

Dr Krol served as an investigator for Pierre-Fabre receiving grants.

Dr Margolis served as a principal investigator for a Valeant postmarketing study. All sponsored research income was paid directly to his employer.

Dr Paller served as a consultant to Anacor, Galderma, Leo Pharma, Promius, Sanofi/Regeneron, and TopMD receiving honoraria; and was an investigator for Astellas, Galderma, Leo Pharma, and TopMD receiving no compensation.

Dr Silverman served as a speaker for Galderma and Promius receiving honoraria.

Dr Simpson served as a consultant for Asubio, Brickell Biotech, Galderma, Medicis, Panmira Pharmaceuticals, and Regeneron, and a speaker for Centocor and Galderma receiving honoraria; and was an investigator for Amgen, Celgene, Galderma, and Regeneron receiving other financial benefits.

Dr Tom served as an investigator for Anacor receiving no compensation.

Dr Elmets served on a data safety monitoring board for Astellas receiving honoraria.

Dr Eichenfield served as a consultant for Anacor, Bayer, and Leo Pharma receiving honoraria, and TopMD receiving stock options; was a consultant and speaker for Galderma receiving honoraria; served as a consultant, speaker, and member of the advisory board for Medicis/Valeant receiving honoraria; and was an investigator for Anacor, Astellas, Galderma, and Leo Pharma receiving no compensation.

Drs Sidbury, Davis, Cordoro, Berger, Schwarzenberger, and Williams, Ms Block, Mr Harrod, and Ms Smith Begolka have no conflicts of interest to declare.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Hanifin JM, Cooper KD, Ho VC, Kang S, Krafchik BR, Margolis DJ, Schachner LA, Sidbury R, Whitmore SE, Sieck CK, Van Voorhees AS. Guidelines of care for atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004 Mar;50(3):391-404. [212 references]

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [American Academy of Dermatology Association Web site](http://www.aad.org/File%20Library/Global%20navigation/Education%20and%20quality%20care/AD-part-3.pdf "American Academy of Dermatology Association Web site").

Print copies: Available from the AAD, PO Box 4014, Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014, Phone: (847) 330-0230 ext. 333; Fax: (847) 330-1120; Web site: [www.aad.org](http://www.aad.org/ "American Academy of Dermatology Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) guideline development process, Schaumburg (IL): American Academy of Dermatology (AAD). Electronic copies: Available from the [American Academy of Dermatology Web site](http://www.aad.org/education/clinical-guidelines/guideline-development-process "American Academy of Dermatology Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



The following is available:

  * Atopic dermatitis. For the public. Schaumburg (IL): American Academy of Dermatology (AAD). Available from the [American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) Web site](http://www.aad.org/dermatology-a-to-z/diseases-and-treatments/a---d/atopic-dermatitis "American Academy of Dermatology \(AAD\) Web site"). 



Please note: This patient information is intended to provide health professionals with information to share with their patients to help them better understand their health and their diagnosed disorders. By providing access to this patient information, it is not the intention of NGC to provide specific medical advice for particular patients. Rather we urge patients and their representatives to review this material and then to consult with a licensed health professional for evaluation of treatment options suitable for them as well as for diagnosis and answers to their personal medical questions. This patient information has been derived and prepared from a guideline for health care professionals included on NGC by the authors or publishers of that original guideline. The patient information is not reviewed by NGC to establish whether or not it accurately reflects the original guideline's content.

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI on April 19, 2004. The information was verified by the guideline developer on May 19, 2004. This summary was updated by ECRI on March 15, 2005 following release of a public health advisory from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration regarding the use of Elidel. This summary was updated by ECRI on January 31, 2006, following release of a public health advisory from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration regarding the use of Elidel Cream (pimecrolimus) and Protopic Ointment (tacrolimus). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on November 6, 2007, following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on CellCept (mycophenolate mofetil). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on July 8, 2008, following the updated U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advisory on CellCept (mycophenolate mofetil) and Myfortic (mycophenolate acid). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on February 19, 2009, following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advisory on CellCept (mycophenolate mofetil). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on March 26, 2009, following the updated FDA advisory on CellCept and Myfortic. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on August 18, 2009, following the revised FDA advisory on CellCept (mycophenolate mofetil). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on August 24, 2009, following the revised FDA advisory on CellCept (mycophenolate mofetil). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on September 11, 2009, following the revised FDA advisory on Myfortic (mycophenolic acid). This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on September 17, 2014. The updated information was verified by the guideline developer on October 15, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

