---
title: "Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline."
id: 11268
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2017 Sep;108(3):416-25. [59 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=28865538 )

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# NEATS Assessment

## Disclosure of Guideline Funding Source

- No

## Disclosure and Management of Financial Conflict of Interests

- 3

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Multidisciplinary Group

- Unknown

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Methodologist Involvement

- Unknown

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Patient and Public Perspectives

- 1

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Search Strategy

- 4

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Study Selection

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Synthesis of Evidence

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Grading the Quality or Strength of Evidence

- 3

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Benefits and Harms of Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Evidence Summary Supporting Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Rating the Strength of Recommendations

- 3

## Specific and Unambiguous Articulation of Recommendations

- 4

## External Review

- 1

## Updating

- 3

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the level of evidence ( **Level I-III** ) and strength of the recommendations ( **Grade A-C** ) are given at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  What Is the Impact of Leiomyomas on Reproductive Outcome? 


####  Summary Statements 


  * Heterogeneous study designs, inconsistent nomenclature, continuous nature of leiomyoma size and location, and insufficient patient recruitment significantly limit the interpretation of results from existing studies that evaluate the impact of fibroids on the likelihood of achieving pregnancy and maintenance of pregnancy. 
  * There is insufficient evidence to conclude that myomas reduce the likelihood of achieving pregnancy with or without fertility treatment. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * There is insufficient evidence to determine that a specific myoma size, number, or location (excluding submucosal myomas or intramural myomas impacting the endometrial cavity contour) is associated with a reduced likelihood of achieving pregnancy or an increased risk of early pregnancy loss. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Does Myomectomy Improve Fertility Outcomes for Women with Intramural or Subserosal Fibroids? 


####  Summary Statements 


  * There is insufficient evidence that removal of subserosal fibroids improves fertility. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * There is fair evidence that myomectomy does not impair reproductive outcomes (clinical pregnancy rates, live-birth rates) following assisted reproductive technology (ART). ( **Grade B** ) 




###  Does Myomectomy Impact the Likelihood of Pregnancy Loss? 


####  Summary Statement 


There is insufficient evidence that myomectomy (laparoscopic or open) reduces miscarriage rates. ( **Grade C** ) 


###  Does Resection of Submucosal Fibroids (Type 0, 1, or 2) Improve Fertility? 


####  Summary Statement 


There is fair evidence that hysteroscopic myomectomy for submucosal fibroids improves clinical pregnancy rates. ( **Grade B** ) 


###  Does Hysteroscopic Resection of Submucosal Myomas Affect Miscarriage Rates? 


####  Summary Statement 


There is insufficient evidence to conclude that hysteroscopic myomectomy reduces the likelihood of early pregnancy loss in women with infertility and a submucous fibroid. ( **Grade C** ) 


###  Recommendations 


  * In asymptomatic women with cavity-distorting myomas (intramural with a submucosal component or submucosal), myomectomy (open or laparoscopic or hysteroscopic) may be considered to improve pregnancy rates. 
  * Myomectomy is generally not advised to improve pregnancy outcomes in asymptomatic infertile women with non–cavity-distorting myomas. However, myomectomy may be reasonable in some circumstances, including but not limited to severe distortion of the pelvic architecture complicating access to the ovaries for oocyte retrieval. 




###  Definitions 


####  Level of Evidence 


#####  Level I 


  * Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
  * RCTs 




#####  Level II 


  * Systematic review of a combination of RCTs, controlled trials without randomization, and cohort studies 
  * Controlled trials without randomization 
  * Cohort studies 
  * Case-control studies 




#####  Level III 


  * Descriptive studies, case series, case reports, letters, nonsystematic reviews, opinions based on clinical experience, and reports of expert committees. 




####  Strength of Recommendations 


**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Uterine myomas (leiomyomata, fibroids)

## Guideline Category

- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Internal Medicine
- Obstetrics and Gynecology
- Surgery

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To evaluate if uterine myomas impact the likelihood of pregnancy and pregnancy loss, and if myomectomy influences pregnancy outcomes in asymptomatic women

**Note** : Obstetrical outcomes are outside the scope of this document.

## Target Population



Women of reproductive age with myomas

## Interventions and Practices Considered



Myomectomy (open, laparoscopic, and hysteroscopic)

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Time to pregnancy 
  * Clinical pregnancy rate 
  * Live-birth rate 
  * Miscarriage rate 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



This clinical practice guideline was based on a systematic review of the literature performed in the electronic database MEDLINE through PubMed on March 3, 2016. No limit or filter was used for the time period covered or English language, but articles were subsequently culled for English language.

A combination of the following medical subject headings or text words were used: abortion; ART; assisted reproductive techn*; birth; embolization; embolization/therapeutic; embryo transfer; endoscopic; endoscopy; fertility; fertilization in vitro; fibroid; fibroma; fibromyoma; hysteroscopy; intrauterine; intrauterine insemination; intrauterine pathology; intrauterine pathologies; in vitro fertilization; in vitro fertilisation; IUI; IVF; laparoscopic; laparoscopy; laparotomy; leiomyoma; metroplast*; miscarriage; myoma; myomect*; pregnancy; pregnancy outcome; removal; reproductive techniques, assisted; uterine; uterine myomectomy; uterine neoplasms; uterus. 

Initially, titles and abstracts of potentially relevant articles were screened and reviewed to develop inclusion/exclusion criteria (see Table 1 in the original guideline document). Only studies that met the inclusion criteria were assessed in the final analysis. Studies were eligible if they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the effectiveness of a procedure correlated with an outcome measure (pregnancy, ovulation, or live-birth rates); meta-analyses; and relevant articles from bibliographies of identified articles.

Four members of an independent task force reviewed the full articles of all citations that potentially matched the predefined selection criteria. Final inclusion or exclusion decisions were made on examination of the articles in full. Disagreements about inclusion among reviewers were discussed and resolved by consensus or arbitration after consultation with an independent reviewer/epidemiologist.

## Number of Source Documents



The electronic search and examination of reference lists from primary and review articles yielded 1,785 studies, of which 88 studies were included.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Level of Evidence</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Level I</strong></p>
<ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
    <li>Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) </li>
    <li>RCTs </li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Level II </strong></p>
<ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
    <li>Systematic review of a combination of RCTs, controlled trials without randomization, and cohort studies </li>
    <li>Controlled trials without randomization </li>
    <li>Cohort studies </li>
    <li>Case-control studies </li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Level III</strong></p>
<ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
    <li>Descriptive studies, case series, case reports, letters, nonsystematic reviews, opinions based on clinical experience, and reports of expert committees. </li>
</ul></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The level of the evidence was evaluated using the grading system found in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field and is assigned for each reference in the bibliography (see the original guideline document).

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The literature was reviewed to answer the following questions:

  * What is the impact of leiomyomas on reproductive outcome? 
  * Does myomectomy improve fertility outcomes for women with intramural or subserosal fibroids? 
  * Does myomectomy impact the likelihood of pregnancy loss? 
  * Does resection of submucosal fibroids (type 0, 1, or 2) improve fertility? 
  * Does hysteroscopic resection of submucosal myomas affect miscarriage rates? 



The strength of the recommendations was evaluated using the grading system found in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" field.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Strength of Recommendations**

**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This document was reviewed by American Society for Reproductive Medicine members and their input was considered in the preparation of the final document.

The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine have approved this report.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each summary statement that supports the recommendations (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * There is fair evidence that myomectomy (open or laparoscopic) for cavity-distorting myomas (intramural or intramural with a submucosal component) improves pregnancy rates and reduces the risk of early pregnancy loss. 
  * There is fair evidence that hysteroscopic myomectomy for cavity-distorting myomas improves clinical pregnancy rates but insufficient evidence regarding the impact of this procedure on the likelihood of live birth or early pregnancy loss. 
  * There is fair evidence that hysteroscopic myomectomy for submucosal fibroids improves clinical pregnancy rates. 



Refer to the original guideline document for details about potential benefits of specific interventions.

## Potential Harms



Refer to the original guideline document for details about potential harms of specific interventions.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



  * This report was developed under the direction of the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine as a service to its members and other practicing clinicians. Although this document reflects appropriate management of a problem encountered in the practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations. 
  * See the "Limitations of the Literature" section in the original guideline document. 



# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2017 Sep;108(3):416-25. [59 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=28865538 )

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2017 Sep

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Reproductive Medicine - Nonprofit Organization

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM)

## Guideline Committee



Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM)

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : Alan Penzias, MD; Kristin Bendikson, MD; Samantha Butts, MD, MSCE; Christos Coutifaris, MD, PhD; Tommaso Falcone, MD; Gregory Fossum, MD; Clarisa Gracia, MD, MSCE; Karl Hansen, MD, PhD; Andrew La Barbera, PhD; Jennifer Mersereau, MD; Randall Odem, MD; Richard Paulson, MD; Samantha Pfeifer, MD; Margareta Pisarska, MD; Robert Rebar, MD; Richard Reindollar, MD; Mitchell Rosen, MD; Jay Sandlow, MD; Michael Vernon, PhD

_Guideline Task Force Members_ : Tommaso Falcone, MD; William Catherino, MD, PhD; Aaron K. Styer, MD; Divya Shah, MD; and Mamie McLean, MD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



All Committee members disclosed commercial and financial relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee who were found to have conflicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or development of this document.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) Web site](http://www.asrm.org/globalassets/asrm/asrm-content/news-and-publications/practice-guidelines/for-non-members/removal_of_myomas_in_asymptomatic_patients_to_improve_infertlity_and-or_reduce_miscarriage_rate-pdfnoprint.pdf "American Society for Reproductive Medicine \(ASRM\) Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Continuing medical education (CME) credit related to this guideline is available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) Web site](https://store.asrm.org/Default.aspx?TabID=1356&productId=6067150&_ga=2.260309133.1041633622.1510159471-917099944.1507225307 "American Society for Reproductive Medicine \(ASRM\) Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on November 29, 2017. The information was verified by the guideline developer on December 21, 2017.

This NEATS assessment was completed by ECRI Institute on October 23, 2017. The information was verified by the guideline developer on December 21, 2017.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

