---
title: "Uterine septum: a guideline."
id: 11129
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Uterine septum: a guideline.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Uterine septum: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2016 Sep 1;106(3):530-40. [59 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=27235766)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the level of evidence ( **Level I-III** ) and the strength of the evidence ( **Grade A-C** ) are given at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Diagnosis of Septate Uterus 


####  Summary Statements 


  * There is fair evidence that 3-D ultrasound, sonohysterography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are good diagnostic tests for distinguishing a septate and bicornuate uterus when compared with laparoscopy/hysteroscopy. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * It is recommended that imaging with hysteroscopy should be used to diagnose uterine septa rather than laparoscopy with hysteroscopy because this approach is less invasive ( **Grade B** ). 




###  Limitations of the Literature 


####  Summary Statement 


  * The data regarding reproductive implications of septate uteri and treatment effects are limited and comprised primarily of observational, principally descriptive studies without untreated control groups. 




###  Does a Septum Impact Fertility? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * There is insufficient evidence to conclude that a uterine septum is associated with infertility. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Does Treating a Septum Improve Fertility in Infertile Women? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * Several observational studies indicate that hysteroscopic septum incision is associated with improved clinical pregnancy rates in women with infertility. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Does a Septum Contribute to Pregnancy Loss or Adverse Pregnancy Outcome? 


####  Summary Statements 


  * There is fair evidence that a uterine septum contributes to miscarriage and preterm birth. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * Some evidence suggests that a uterine septum may increase the risk of other adverse pregnancy outcomes such as malpresentation, intrauterine growth restriction, placental abruption, and perinatal mortality. ( **Grade B** ) 




###  Does Treating a Septum Improve Obstetrical Outcomes? 


####  Summary Statements 


  * Some limited studies indicate that hysteroscopic septum incision is associated with a reduction in subsequent miscarriage rates and improvement in live-birth rates in patients with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * Some limited studies indicate that hysteroscopic septum incision is associated with an improvement in live-birth rate in women with infertility or prior pregnancy loss. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Are Septum Characteristics Associated with Worse Reproductive Outcomes? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * There is insufficient evidence to conclude that obstetric outcomes are different when comparing the size as defined by length or width of uterine septa. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Surgery to Treat a Uterine Septum 


####  Summary Statement 


  * There is insufficient evidence to recommend a specific method for hysteroscopic septum incision. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  How Long After Surgical Treatment of a Uterine Septum Should a Woman Wait to Conceive? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * Although the available evidence suggests that the uterine cavity is healed by 2 months postoperatively, there is insufficient evidence to advocate a specific length of time before a woman should conceive. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Should Preoperative Management to Thin the Endometrium Be Used? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * There is insufficient evidence for or against recommending danazol or gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists to thin the endometrium prior to hysteroscopic septum incision. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Is Adhesion Prevention Needed? 


####  Summary Statement 


  * There is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against adhesion prevention treatment, or any specific method following hysteroscopic septum incision. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Recommendations 


  * It is recommended that imaging or imaging with hysteroscopy should be used to diagnose uterine septa rather than laparoscopy with hysteroscopy because this approach is less invasive. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * In a patient with infertility, prior pregnancy loss, or poor obstetrical outcome it is reasonable to consider septum incision. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * In a patient without infertility or prior pregnancy loss, it may be reasonable to consider septum incision following counseling regarding potential risks and benefits of the procedure. ( **Grade C** ) 




###  Definitions 


####  Level of Evidence 


**Level I** : Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial. 


**Level II-1** : Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization. 


**Level II-2** : Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group. 


**Level II-3** : Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence. 


**Level III** : Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees. 


####  Strength of Evidence 


**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Septate uterus 
  * Infertility 
  * Pregnancy loss 



## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Management
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Obstetrics and Gynecology

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To review the literature regarding septate uterus and determine optimal indications and methods of treatment for it

## Target Population



Women with a septate uterus

## Interventions and Practices Considered



 **Diagnosis/Evaluation**

  1. 3-D ultrasound 
  2. Sonohysterography 
  3. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
  4. Imaging with hysteroscopy 



**Treatment/Management**

  1. Hysteroscopic septum incision 
  2. Counseling regarding potential risks and benefits of septum incision 



**Note** : The following interventions/practices were considered but there was insufficient evidence to make recommendations for or against: comparing the size (i.e., length or width) of uterine septa to determine obstetric outcomes; specific methods for hysteroscopic septum incision; specific lengths of time before a woman should conceive after septum incision; use of danazol or gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists to thin the endometrium prior to hysteroscopic septum incision; adhesion prevention treatment; or any specific method following hysteroscopic septum incision.

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Pregnancy rate 
  * Implantation rate 
  * Live-birth rate 
  * Miscarriage rate 
  * Risk of infertility 
  * Adverse pregnancy outcomes 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Description of Search**

This clinical practice guideline was based on a systematic review of the literature. Systematic literature searches of relevant articles were performed in the electronic database MEDLINE through PubMed in March and April 2015, with a filter for human subject research. No limit or filter was used for time period covered or English language, but articles were subsequently culled for English language.

A combination of the following medical subject headings or text words/keywords were used: abortion, adhesion, adhesions, arcuate, bicornuate, birth control pill, congenital anomalies, congenital anomaly, congenital abnormalities, congenital abnormality, contraceptive, danazol, detection, diagnose, diagnosis, hysterosalpingogram, hysteroscopic, hysteroscopy, infertility, intrauterine, laparoscopic, laparoscopy, live birth, Lupron, metroplasty, miscarriage, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), outcome, perinatal outcome, perinatal outcomes, pregnancies, pregnancy, pregnancy loss, premature, preterm, progestin, repair, resection, resectoscope, septa, septal, septate, septum, sonohysterogram, surgery, treatment, ultrasonography, uteri, uterine, uterus.

Initially, titles and abstracts of potentially relevant articles were screened and reviewed for inclusion/exclusion criteria. Protocols and results of the studies were examined according to specific inclusion criteria. Only studies that met the inclusion criteria were assessed in the final analysis. Studies were eligible if they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the effectiveness of a procedure correlated with an outcome measure (pregnancy, implantation, or live-birth rates); meta-analyses; and relevant articles from bibliographies of identified articles.

Four members of an independent task force reviewed the full articles of all citations that possibly matched the predefined selection criteria. Final inclusion or exclusion decisions were made on examination of the articles in full. Disagreements about inclusion among reviewers were discussed and solved by consensus or arbitration after consultation with an independent reviewer/epidemiologist.

**Summary of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria**

_Inclusion Criteria_

  * Level 1, II-1, II-2, II-3 studies; systematic reviews/meta-analyses 
  * Human studies 
  * English 
  * Studies that report clinical (fertility and/or obstetrical) outcomes 
  * Studies that focus on septate, arcuate, bicornuate uterine anomalies and/or adhesions 



_Exclusion Criteria_

  * Level III studies: small series, case reports, reviews, opinions, off topic 
  * Animal studies 
  * Non-English 
  * Studies that focus on prevalence with no fertility and/or obstetrical outcome measures 
  * Studies that do not focus on septate uterus, but focus on unicornuate or didelphic uteri, or fibroids and polyps, or cervix and vagina, obstructed hemivagina and ipsilateral renal anomaly (OHVIRA) or Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich (HWW), Asherman, Fryns, or Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome 
  * Studies with a focus on amenorrhea, blood flow, cancer, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, hemodynamics, menorrhagia, ovarian maldescent, polycystic ovary syndrome, surgical technique only, uterine horn, uterine prolapse, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
  * Studies with a focus on pediatric or postpartum population 
  * Studies with a focus on abdominal metroplasty 



## Number of Source Documents



Number of studies identified in an electronic search and from examination of reference lists from primary and review articles = 1,034; number of studies included = 204.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Level of Evidence</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Level I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>
<p><strong>Level III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The quality of the evidence was evaluated using the grading system found in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field and is assigned for each reference in the bibliography of the original guideline document.

Systematic reviews/meta-analyses were individually considered and included if they followed a strict methodological process and assessed relevant evidence.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The literature was reviewed to answer the following questions:

  1. Does a septum cause infertility? 
  2. Does a septum contribute to adverse obstetrical outcomes? Adverse obstetrical outcomes are pregnancy loss (early and late), preterm birth, and intrauterine death. 
  3. Does treating a septum improve fertility? What method or technique improves outcomes? 
  4. Does treating a septum improve obstetrical outcomes? (pregnancy loss, duration of pregnancy, rupture) 
  5. How to diagnose a septum? Are there other methods as accurate as laparoscopy/hysteroscopy to diagnose a septum? 
  6. Are some types of deformity associated with worse outcomes? (short/long; thin/thick) 
  7. How long after septum repair should a woman wait to conceive? 
  8. Should you give preoperative management (medications vs. nothing) to thin the endometrium? (danazol, Lupron, birth control pill, progestins) 
  9. Does adhesion prevention work? (treatment vs. nothing, estrogen therapy, Foley balloon, intrauterine device [IUD], barrier slurries) 



## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



**Strength of Evidence**

**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This document was reviewed by American Society for Reproductive Medicine members, and their input was considered in the preparation of the final document.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * There is fair evidence that 3-D ultrasound, sonohysterography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are good diagnostic tests for distinguishing a septate and bicornuate uterus when compared with laparoscopy/hysteroscopy. 
  * Several studies indicate that treating a uterine septum is associated with an improvement in live-birth rates in women with a history of prior pregnancy loss, recurrent pregnancy loss, or infertility. 



## Potential Harms



There have been 18 case reports in the literature of uterine rupture during pregnancy or delivery following septum incision. Risk of subsequent pregnancy-related uterine rupture is correlated with excessive septal excision, penetration of the myometrium, uterine wall perforation, and excessive use of cautery or laser energy during the initial septum incision procedure.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This report was developed under the direction of the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine as a service to its members and other practicing clinicians. Although this document reflects appropriate management of a problem encountered in the practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations. The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine have approved this report.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Uterine septum: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2016 Sep 1;106(3):530-40. [59 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=27235766)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2016 Sep 1

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Reproductive Medicine - Nonprofit Organization

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Guideline Committee



Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : Samantha Pfeifer, MD; Samantha Butts, MD, MSCE; Daniel Dumesic, MD; Clarisa Gracia, MD, MSCE; Michael Vernon, PhD; Gregory Fossum, MD; Andrew La Barbera PhD, HCLD; Jennifer Mersereau, MD; Randall Odem, MD; Alan Penzias, MD; Margareta Pisarska, MD; Robert Rebar, MD; Richard Reindollar, MD; Mitchell Rosen, MD; Jay Sandlow, MD; Eric Widra, MD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



All Committee members disclosed commercial and financial relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee who were found to have conflicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or development of this document.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Fertility and Sterility Web site](http://www.fertstert.org/article/S0015-0282\(16\)61281-5/pdf "Fertility and Sterility Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Continuing medical education (CME) credit related to this guideline is available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](https://store.asrm.org/Default.aspx?TabID=1533 "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site"). 

## Patient Resources



None provided

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 3, 2017. The information was not verified by the guideline developer.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

