---
title: "Anemia in pregnancy."
id: 6764
permalink: /:collection/6764
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Anemia in pregnancy.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Anemia in pregnancy. Washington (DC): American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG); 2008 Jul. 7 p. (ACOG practice bulletin; no. 95). [32 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) reaffirmed the currency of this guideline in 2013.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The grades of evidence (I-III) and levels of recommendation (A-C) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


**The following conclusion is based on good and consistent scientific evidence (Level A)** : 


  * Iron supplementation decreases the prevalence of maternal anemia at delivery. 




**The following recommendations and conclusions are based on limited or inconsistent evidence (Level B)** : 


  * Iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk of low birth weight, preterm delivery, and perinatal mortality. 
  * Severe anemia with maternal hemoglobin (Hgb) levels less than 6 g/dL has been associated with abnormal fetal oxygenation resulting in nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns, reduced amniotic fluid volume, fetal cerebral vasodilatation, and fetal death. Thus, maternal transfusion should be considered for fetal indications. 




**The following recommendations are based primarily on consensus and expert opinion (Level C)** : 


  * All pregnant women should be screened for anemia, and those with iron deficiency anemia should be treated with supplemental iron, in addition to prenatal vitamins. 
  * Patients with anemia other than iron deficiency anemia should be further evaluated. 
  * Failure to respond to iron therapy should prompt further investigation and may suggest an incorrect diagnosis, coexisting disease, malabsorption (sometimes caused by the use of enteric-coated tablets or concomitant use of antacids), noncompliance, or blood loss. 




**_Definitions_ ** : 


####  Grades of Evidence 


**I** : Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized controlled trial. 


**II-1** : Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization. 


**II-2** : Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case–control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group. 


**II-3** : Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments also could be regarded as this type of evidence. 


**III** : Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees. 


####  Levels of Recommendations 


**Level A** \- Recommendations are based on good and consistent scientific evidence. 


**Level B** \- Recommendations are based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence. 


**Level C** \- Recommendations are based primarily on consensus and expert opinion. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Anemia
  * Pregnancy



## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Evaluation
- Management
- Prevention
- Screening
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Hematology
- Obstetrics and Gynecology

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)


  * To aid practitioners in making decisions about appropriate obstetric and gynecologic care
  * To provide a brief overview of the causes of anemia in pregnancy and review iron requirements
  * To provide recommendations for screening and clinical management of anemia during pregnancy



## Target Population



Pregnant women

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Iron supplementation
  2. Screening for anemia during pregnancy
  3. Maternal transfusion in case of severe anemia
  4. Parenteral iron for patients who cannot tolerate oral iron: iron dextran or ferrous sucrose
  5. Autologous transfusion
  6. Prenatal vitamin supplementation



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Effectiveness of screening for anemia during pregnancy
  * Effectiveness of anemia prophylaxis during pregnancy



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



 **2008 Original Guideline**

The MEDLINE database, the Cochrane Library, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists' (ACOG's) own internal resources and documents were used to conduct a literature search to locate relevant articles published between January 1985 and September 2007. The search was restricted to articles published in the English language. Priority was given to articles reporting results of original research, although review articles and commentaries also were consulted. Abstracts of research presented at symposia and scientific conferences were not considered adequate for inclusion in this document. Guidelines published by organizations or institutions such as the National Institutes of Health and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists were reviewed, and additional studies were located by reviewing bibliographies of identified articles.

**2013 Reaffirmation**

The NCBI database was searched from 2008 to 2013. Committee members conducted a literature search with the assistance from the ACOG Resource Center staff who routinely perform the Practice Bulletin literature searches.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>Studies were reviewed and evaluated for quality according to the method outlined by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force:</p>

<p><strong>I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized controlled trial.</p>

<p><strong>II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>

<p><strong>II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case&#8211;control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>

<p><strong>II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments also could be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>

<p><strong>III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **2008 Original Guideline**

Analysis of available evidence was given priority in formulating recommendations. When reliable research was not available, expert opinions from obstetrician–gynecologists were used. See also the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of Recommendations" field regarding Grade C recommendations.

**2013 Reaffirmation**

The Committee on Practice Bulletins - Obstetrics met in March 2013 and reaffirmed this document. A committee member reviewed the document and new literature on the topic. The document was then reviewed by the committee and the committee agreed that it is current and accurate.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



Based on the highest level of evidence found in the data, recommendations are provided and graded according to the following categories:

**Level A** \- Recommendations are based on good and consistent scientific evidence.

**Level B** \- Recommendations are based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence.

**Level C** \- Recommendations are based primarily on consensus and expert opinion.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Practice Bulletins are validated by two internal clinical review panels composed of practicing obstetrician-gynecologists generalists and sub-specialists. The final guidelines are also reviewed and approved by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Executive Board.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see "Major Recommendations").

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Appropriate evaluation and treatment of anemia in pregnancy
  * Iron supplementation decreases the prevalence of maternal anemia at delivery



## Potential Harms


  * There is little evidence that iron supplementation results in morbidity beyond gastrointestinal symptoms, except in patients with hemochromatosis or certain other genetic disorders.
  * Anaphylactic reactions have been reported in 1% of patients receiving parenteral iron dextran.



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



These guidelines should not be construed as dictating an exclusive course of treatment or procedure. Variations in practice may be warranted based on the needs of the individual patient, resources, and limitations unique to the institution or type of practice.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Audit Criteria/Indicators

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Anemia in pregnancy. Washington (DC): American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG); 2008 Jul. 7 p. (ACOG practice bulletin; no. 95). [32 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2008 Jul (reaffirmed 2013)

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)

## Guideline Committee



American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee on Practice Bulletins - Obstetrics

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



Not stated

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Not stated

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) reaffirmed the currency of this guideline in 2013.

## Guideline Availability



No electronic copies available

Print copies: Available for purchase from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Distribution Center, PO Box 933104, Atlanta, GA 31193-3104; telephone, 800-762-2264, ext. 192; e-mail: [sales@acog.org](mailto:sales@acog.org). The ACOG Bookstore is available online at the [ACOG Web site](http://www.acog.org/bookstore/ "ACOG Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Proposed performance measures are included in the original guideline document.

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on January 5, 2008. The information was verified by the guideline developer on January 23, 2009. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on October 29, 2009 following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on Dexferrum (iron dextran injection). The currency of the guideline was reaffirmed by the developer in 2013 and this summary was updated by ECRI Institute on March 7, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

