---
title: Prenatal care.
id: 10231
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Prenatal care.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- University of Michigan Health System. Prenatal care. Ann Arbor (MI): University of Michigan Health System (UMHS); 2013 Dec. 17 p. [19 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



#####  Note from the University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) and the National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC): The following guidance was current as of December 2013. Because UMHS occasionally releases minor revisions to its guidance based on new information, users may wish to consult the original guideline document for the most current version. 


**Note from NGC** : The following key points summarize the content of the guideline. Refer to the full text for detailed information on each of the screening procedures. 


The strength of recommendation (I-III) and levels of evidence (A-D) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Key Points 


####  Prenatal Care Summary 


Main aspects of prenatal care (history and examination, testing and treatment, and education and planning) are summarized from preconception through delivery in Table 1 in the original guideline document. 


####  Fetal Surveillance 


Common indications for antepartum fetal surveillance and gestational age at which to initiate testing as well as frequency of testing are presented in Table 2 in the original guideline document. 


####  Referral 


Indications for referral are summarized in Table 3 in the original guideline document. 


####  Important Care Aspects 


#####  Assess risk factors. For all women, perform a history and physical that includes a risk assessment with a goal of identifying risk factors for adverse pregnancy outcome [I-D]. 


#####  Visit timing and frequency. For average risk women, the first prenatal visit should be an intake at 6 to 8 weeks, with provider review and a follow-up office visit at 10 to 12 weeks. Subsequent visits may occur on a schedule of every 4 to 6 weeks until 34 weeks, then every 2 weeks until 37 weeks, and weekly thereafter [I-C]. 


#####  Progesterone therapy. Progesterone should be offered to patients who have a history of prior spontaneous preterm birth or who are found to have a shortened cervix on ultrasound [I-A]. 


#####  Sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing. Test all women for sexually transmissible infections including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Patients at risk for STIs during pregnancy should be retested in the third trimester [I-A]. 


#####  Estimated delivery date (EDD). Establish a patient's EDD prior to 20 weeks, with consideration given to menstrual history, mode of conception, and sonographic findings using standardized criteria (refer to the "Delivery Planning" section in the original guideline document) [I-C]. 


######  Diabetes risk. At the first prenatal visit evaluate risk factors for diabetes and test high-risk patients [I-C]. Screen all women without a diagnosis of diabetes for gestational diabetes at 24 to 28 weeks using a 50 gram glucose challenge with a cutoff of ≥135 mg/dl at 1 hour [1-A]. 


#####  Tetanus diphtheria and pertussis (Tdap) vaccination. Offer Tdap vaccination to all women. This is optimally performed at 27 to 36 weeks in order to facilitate passive immunization of newborns for pertussis [I-D]. 


#####  No non-medically-indicated delivery <39 weeks. Non-medically-indicated planned delivery before 39 weeks' gestation is contraindicated [III-B]. 


###  Definitions: 


####  Level of Evidence 


  1. Randomized controlled trials 
  2. Controlled trials, no randomization 
  3. Observational trials 
  4. Opinion of expert panel 




####  Strength of Recommendation 


  1. Generally should be performed 
  2. May be reasonable to perform 
  3. Generally should not be performed 


## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Pregnancy

## Guideline Category

- Counseling
- Evaluation
- Management
- Prevention
- Risk Assessment
- Screening
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Obstetrics and Gynecology
- Pediatrics
- Preventive Medicine

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To promote maternal and infant health 
  * To reduce maternal mortality and morbidity and fetal loss 
  * To reduce preterm birth, intrauterine growth restriction, congenital anomalies, and failure to thrive 



## Target Population



Women of childbearing age, pregnant women, and their fetuses

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. History and physical examination 
  2. Patient education and planning 
  3. Antepartum fetal surveillance 
  4. Risk assessment for adverse pregnancy outcome and indication for referral for high-risk pregnancy 
  5. Establishment of visit timing and frequency 
  6. Progesterone therapy for patients with a history of prior spontaneous preterm birth 
  7. Sexually transmitted infection (STI) screening 
  8. Establishing of estimated delivery date (EDD) 
  9. Evaluation of diabetes risk 
  10. Tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis (Tdap) vaccination 
  11. Avoidance of non-medically-indicated planned delivery before 39 weeks gestation 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Maternal morbidity and mortality 
  * Incidence of fetal loss 
  * Incidence and severity of complications of pregnancy 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



For this update the initial evidence base was the literature search performed to develop the 2006 version of this guideline. The team accepted the literature search performed to produce the Veterans Administration (VA)/Department of Defense (DoD) and Veterans Administration to produce the VA/DoD Practice Guideline for Pregnancy Management (2009). That search included literature through December 2007. A MEDLINE search for literature published since that time was performed. The search was conducted prospectively using the major key words of pregnancy (prenatal care); guidelines, controlled trials, cohort studies; published from 1/1/08 through 1/31/12, women (adolescent, adult), English language. Specific searches were performed for: Genetic screening & counseling (hemoglobinopathies, cystic fibrosis, Ashkenazi Jews), Nutrition counseling (folic acid, calcium supplementation, diet/foods), other counseling (weight gain in pregnancy, exercise, contraception counseling), Laboratory studies (rubella titer, hemoglobin/hematocrit, Hepatitis B surface antigen, HIV, Rh factor blood type, urine culture or urinalysis, screening for sexually transmitted disease, Pap smear, hypothyroidism, TB testing), comorbid conditions (obesity, depression, domestic violence, recurrent preterm birth, herpes simplex management, prenatal visits (frequency, urine dipstick, fetal growth assessment, fetal imaging/ultrasound, gestational age determination, screening for aneuploidy, screening for neural tube defects, screening for diabetes/gestational diabetes, anemia, preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, fetal movement counts, group B streptococcus, breech, membrane sweeping, identification of a pediatrician, delivery (timing, repeat cesarean delivery and vaginal birth after cesarean delivery, elective primary cesarean delivery), breast feeding, indications for referral to high risk care, cultural sensitivity.

The searches were supplemented with recent clinical trials known to expert members of the panel. The search was single cycle.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Level of Evidence</strong></p>
<ol style="list-style-type: upper-alpha;">
    <li>Randomized controlled trials </li>
    <li>Controlled trials, no randomization </li>
    <li>Observational trials </li>
    <li>Opinion of expert panel </li>
</ol></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Conclusions were based on prospective randomized clinical trials (RCTs) if available, to the exclusion of other data. If RTCs were not available, observational studies were admitted to consideration. If no such data were available, expert opinion was used to estimate effect size.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Strength of Recommendation**

  1. Generally should be performed 
  2. May be reasonable to perform 
  3. Generally should not be performed 



## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



Drafts of this guideline were reviewed in clinical conferences and by distribution for comment within departments and divisions of the University of Michigan Medical School to which the content is most relevant: Family Medicine, Obstetrics/Gynecology, and Pediatrics. The guideline was approved by the Perinatal Joint Practice Committee and the Executive Committee of the University of Michigan C. S. Mott Children's Hospital and Von Voightlander Women's Hospital. The final version was endorsed by the Clinical Practice Committee of the University of Michigan Faculty Group Practice and the Executive Committee for Clinical Affairs of the University of Michigan Hospitals and Health Centers.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

Conclusions were based on prospective randomized clinical trials (RCTs) if available, to the exclusion of other data. If RCTs were not available, observational studies were admitted to consideration. If no such data were available for a given link in the problem formulation, expert opinion was used to estimate effect size.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate evaluation and management of women and their fetuses from preconception through pregnancy

## Potential Harms



Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and amniocentesis are invasive procedures that provide diagnostic information but carry risk for pregnancy loss.

# Contraindications

## Contraindications



Non-medically-indicated planned delivery before 39 weeks' gestation is contraindicated.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



These guidelines should not be construed as including all proper methods of care or excluding other acceptable methods of care reasonably directed to obtaining the same results. The ultimate judgment regarding any specific clinical procedure or treatment must be made by the physician in light of the circumstances presented by the patient.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Patient Resources
- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- University of Michigan Health System. Prenatal care. Ann Arbor (MI): University of Michigan Health System (UMHS); 2013 Dec. 17 p. [19 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Dec

## Guideline Developer(s)

- University of Michigan Health System - Academic Institution

## Source(s) of Funding



University of Michigan Health System

## Guideline Committee



Prenatal Care Guideline Team

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Team Leader_ : Mark C. Chames, MD, Obstetrics/Gynecology

_Team Members_ : Joanne M. Bailey, CNM, PhD, Obstetrics/Gynecology; Grant M. Greenberg, MD, MA, MHSA, Family Medicine; R Van Harrison, PhD, Medical Education; Jocelyn H. Schiller, MD, Pediatrics

_University of Michigan Health System Guidelines Oversight Team_ : Grant Greenberg, MD, MA, MHSA; R. Van Harrison, PhD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The University of Michigan Health System endorses the Guidelines of the Association of American Medical Colleges and the Standards of the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education that the individuals who present educational activities disclose significant relationships with commercial companies whose products or services are discussed. Disclosure of a relationship is not intended to suggest bias in the information presented, but is made to provide readers with information that might be of potential importance to their evaluation of the information.

No member of the Prenatal Care Guideline Team has relationships with commercial companies whose products are discussed in this guideline.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) Web site](http://www.med.umich.edu/1info/FHP/practiceguides/newpnc.html "University of Michigan Health System Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Continuing Medical Education (CME) information is available from the [University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) Web site](http://ocpd.med.umich.edu/cme/self-study/Prenatal%20Care "University of Michigan Health System Web site").

## Patient Resources



Several patient-education handouts on various topics associated with prenatal care are available from the [University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) Web site](http://sitemaker.umich.edu/umhs.patiented/clinical_care_guidelines_handouts&recordID=0000c0a8de11000007d7e70000000144305925f80cbfdfab&config=y0RVvSqwXzXMi8qgVCs5Yw&mode=list&column0=Notes&sortColumn0=Title&comparisonType0=contains+\(text+only\)&value0=prenatal+care&sortDirection0=Ascending "University of Michigan Health System \(UMHS\) Web site").

Please note: This patient information is intended to provide health professionals with information to share with their patients to help them better understand their health and their diagnosed disorders. By providing access to this patient information, it is not the intention of NGC to provide specific medical advice for particular patients. Rather we urge patients and their representatives to review this material and then to consult with a licensed health professional for evaluation of treatment options suitable for them as well as for diagnosis and answers to their personal medical questions. This patient information has been derived and prepared from a guideline for health care professionals included on NGC by the authors or publishers of that original guideline. The patient information is not reviewed by NGC to establish whether or not it accurately reflects the original guideline's content.

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on April 10, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is copyrighted by the University of Michigan Health System (UMHS).

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

