---
title: "A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of adult patients with hyperglycemia."
id: 9368
permalink: /:collection/9368
---

# General

## Guideline Title

A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of adult patients with hyperglycemia.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- McMahon MM, Nystrom E, Braunschweig C, Miles J, Compher C, American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors. A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of adult patients with hyperglycemia. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013 Jan;37(1):23-36. [60 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22753619)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the grading of recommendations ( **Strong, Weak, Further Research Needed** ) and levels of evidence ( **High, Moderate, Low, Very Low** ) are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


####  What is the Desired Blood Glucose Goal Range in Adult Hospitalized Patients Receiving Nutrition Support? 


The authors recommend a target blood glucose goal range of 140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10 mmol/L). ( **Strong** ) 


####  How is Hypoglycemia Defined in Adult Hospitalized Patients Receiving Nutrition Support? 


The authors recommend that hypoglycemia be defined as a blood concentration of  <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L). ( **Strong** ) 


####  Should Diabetes-Specific Enteral Formulas Be Used for Adult Hospitalized Patients With Hyperglycemia? 


The authors cannot make a recommendation at this time. ( **Further research needed** ) 


###  Definitions: 


####  Level of Evidence 


**High** : Further research is very unlikely to change the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect 


**Moderate** : Further research is likely to have an important impact on the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate 


**Low** : Further research is very likely to have an important impact on the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate 


**Very Low** : Any estimate of effect is very uncertain 


####  Grade of Recommendation 


**Strong** : Net benefits outweigh harms 


**Weak** : Tradeoffs for patient are important 


**Further research needed** : Uncertain tradeoffs 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



  * Conditions or disease states requiring nutrition support 
  * Hyperglycemia 



## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Evaluation
- Management

## Clinical Specialty

- Critical Care
- Endocrinology
- Gastroenterology
- Geriatrics
- Nursing
- Nutrition
- Pharmacology

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Allied Health Personnel
- Health Care Providers
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Pharmacists
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To summarize the most current evidence and provides guidelines for the desired blood glucose goal range in hospitalized patients receiving nutrition support, the definition of hypoglycemia, and the rationale for use of diabetes-specific enteral formulas in hospitalized patients

**Note** : This guideline does not address other specific strategies for managing hyperglycemia in patients receiving nutrition support, as there are little to no data to support clinical practice recommendations in this area.

## Target Population



Adult hospitalized patients receiving nutrition support

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Target blood glucose goals 
  2. Criteria for defining hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients receiving nutrition support 
  3. Diabetes specific enteral formulas for adult patients with hyperglycemia (considered but not recommended). 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Mortality 
  * Adverse outcomes associated with hyperglycemia 
  * Glycemic and lipid control 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



For the current Clinical Guideline, inclusion criteria of adult subjects, complication of hyperglycemia, and hospital setting were used. Search terms of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, clinical outcomes, parenteral nutrition, and enteral nutrition were applied in various combinations to CENTRAL (The Cochrane Library), MEDLINE, EMBASE, Science Citation Index Expanded, LILACS, and CINAHL (until December 2011).

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Level of Evidence</strong></p>
<p><strong>High</strong>: Further research is very unlikely to change the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect</p>
<p><strong>Moderate</strong>: Further research is likely to have an important impact on the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate</p>
<p><strong>Low</strong>: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on the authors' confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate</p>
<p><strong>Very Low</strong>: Any estimate of effect is very uncertain</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



A systematic review of the best available evidence to answer a series of questions regarding glucose control in adults receiving parenteral or enteral nutrition was undertaken and evaluated using concepts adopted from the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation working group.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Clinical Guidelines have adopted concepts of the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. Briefly, specific clinical questions where nutrition support is a relevant mode of therapy are developed and key clinical outcomes are identified. A rigorous search of the published literature is conducted, each included study assessed for research quality, tables of findings developed, the body of evidence for the question evaluated, and a recommendation for clinical practice that is based on both the best available evidence and the risks and benefits to patients developed by consensus. Recommendations are graded as strong when the evidence is strong and/or net benefits outweigh harms. Weak recommendations may be based on weaker evidence and/or important trade-offs to the patient. When limited research is available to answer a question, no recommendation can be made.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Grade of Recommendation**

**Strong** : Net benefits outweigh harms

**Weak** : Tradeoffs for patient are important

**Further research needed** : Uncertain tradeoffs

## Cost Analysis



A cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



A consensus process was used to develop the clinical guideline recommendations prior to external and internal review and approval by the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence ranges from prospective randomized trials to expert opinion/consensus.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



In hospitalized patients receiving nutrition support:

  * Reduction in adverse outcomes due to hyperglycemia 
  * Improvement in assessment (definition/target range) of blood glucose control 



## Potential Harms



Both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia (resulting from attempts to correct hyperglycemia) are associated with adverse outcomes in diabetic as well as nondiabetic patients.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Clinical Guidelines are based on general conclusions of health professionals who, in developing such guidelines, have balanced potential benefits to be derived from a particular mode of medical therapy against certain risks inherent with such therapy. However, the professional judgment of the attending health professional is the primary component of quality medical care. Because guidelines cannot account for every variation in circumstances, the practitioner must always exercise professional judgment in their application. These Clinical Guidelines are intended to supplement, but not replace, professional training and judgment.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Resources

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- McMahon MM, Nystrom E, Braunschweig C, Miles J, Compher C, American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors. A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines: nutrition support of adult patients with hyperglycemia. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013 Jan;37(1):23-36. [60 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22753619)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Jan

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.)

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : M. Molly McMahon, MD; Erin Nystrom, PharmD, BCNSP; Carol Braunschweig, PhD, RD; John Miles, MD; Charlene Compher, PhD, RD, CNSC, LDN, FADA; American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.) Board of Directors

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Financial disclosure: none declared

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site](http://pen.sagepub.com/content/37/1/23.full "of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available: 

  * Clinical guidelines for the use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adult and pediatric patients: applying the GRADE system to development of A.S.P.E.N. clinical guidelines. American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). 2012 Jan. 5 p. Electronic copies: Available from the [Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Web site](http://pen.sagepub.com/content/36/1/77.extract).



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on December 27, 2012. The information was verified by the guideline developer on January 21, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

