---
title: Hip pain and mobility deficits—hip osteoarthritis: revision 2017.
id: 11307
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Hip pain and mobility deficits—hip osteoarthritis: revision 2017.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cibulka MT, Bloom NJ, Enseki KR, Macdonald CW, Woehrle J, McDonough CM. Hip pain and mobility deficits-hip osteoarthritis: revision 2017. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2017 Jun;47(6):A1-A37. [77 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=28566053 )

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Cibulka MT, White DM, Woehrle J, Harris-Hayes M, Enseki K, Fagerson TL, Slover J, Godges JJ. Hip pain and mobility deficits--hip osteoarthritis: clinical practice guidelines linked to the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health from the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2009 Apr;39(4):A1-25. [216 references].

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# NEATS Assessment

## Disclosure of Guideline Funding Source

- Yes

## Disclosure and Management of Financial Conflict of Interests

- 3

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Multidisciplinary Group

- Yes

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Methodologist Involvement

- Yes

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Patient and Public Perspectives

- 4

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Search Strategy

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Study Selection

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Synthesis of Evidence

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Grading the Quality or Strength of Evidence

- 4

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Benefits and Harms of Recommendations

- 4

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Evidence Summary Supporting Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Rating the Strength of Recommendations

- 4

## Specific and Unambiguous Articulation of Recommendations

- 5

## External Review

- 5

## Updating

- 5

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Levels of evidence ( **I–V** ) and grades of recommendation ( **A–F** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


**Note** : These recommendations and clinical practice guidelines are based on the scientific literature published prior to April 2016. Please refer to the American Physical Therapy Association's (APTA's) previously published guidelines on "Hip Pain and Mobility Deficits – Hip Osteoarthritis" for literature reviewed prior to 2009. 


###  Diagnosis/Classification 


Clinicians should use the following criteria to classify adults over the age of 50 years into the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD) category of coxarthrosis and the associated International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) impairment-based category of hip pain (b28016 Pain in joints) and mobility deficits (b7100 Mobility of a single joint): moderate anterior or lateral hip pain during weight-bearing activities, morning stiffness less than 1 hour in duration after wakening, hip internal rotation range of motion less than 24° or internal rotation and hip flexion 15° less than the nonpainful side, and/or increased hip pain associated with passive hip internal rotation. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


###  Differential Diagnosis 


Clinicians should revise the diagnosis and change their plan of care, or refer the patient to the appropriate clinician, when the patient's history, reported activity limitations, or impairments of body function and structure are not consistent with those presented in the diagnosis/classification section of this guideline, or when the patient's symptoms are not diminishing with interventions aimed at normalization of the patient's impairments of body function. ( **Grade of Recommendation: F** ) 


###  Examination 


**Outcome Measures: Activity Limitation/Self-Report Measures**


Clinicians should use validated outcome measures that include domains of hip pain, body function impairment, activity limitation, and participation restriction to assess outcomes of treatment of hip osteoarthritis. 


Measures to assess hip pain may include the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) pain subscale, Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), pressure pain threshold (PPT), and pain visual analog scale (VAS). 


Activity limitation and participation restriction outcome measures may include the WOMAC physical function subscale, the Hip disability and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (HOOS), Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS), and Harris Hip Score (HHS). 


( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


####  Activity Limitation/Physical Performance Measures 


To assess activity limitation, participation restrictions, and changes in the patient's level of function over the episode of care, clinicians should utilize reliable and valid physical performance measures, such as the 6-minute walk test, 30-second chair stand, stair measure, timed up-and-go test, self-paced walk, timed single-leg stance, 4-square step test, and step test. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


Clinicians should measure balance performance and activities that predict the risk of falls in adults with hip osteoarthritis, especially those with decreased physical function or a high risk of falls because of past history. Recommended balance tests for patients with osteoarthritis include the Berg Balance Scale, 4-square step test, and timed single-leg stance test. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


Clinicians should use published recommendations from the Academy of Geriatric Physical Therapy of the American Physical Therapy Association to guide fall risk management in patients with hip osteoarthritis to assess and manage fall risk. ( **Grade of Recommendation: F** ) 


####  Physical Impairment Measures 


When examining a patient with hip pain/hip osteoarthritis over an episode of care, clinicians should document the flexion, abduction, and external rotation (FABER or Patrick's) test and passive hip range of motion and hip muscle strength, including internal rotation, external rotation, flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


###  Interventions 


####  Patient Education 


Clinicians should provide patient education combined with exercise and/or manual therapy. Education should include teaching activity modification, exercise, supporting weight reduction when overweight, and methods of unloading the arthritic joints. ( **Grade of Recommendation: B** ) 


####  Functional, Gait, and Balance Training 


Clinicians should provide impairment-based functional, gait, and balance training, including the proper use of assistive devices (canes, crutches, walkers), to patients with hip osteoarthritis and activity limitations, balance impairment, and/or gait limitations when associated problems are observed and documented during the history or physical assessment of the patient. ( **Grade of Recommendation: C** ) 


Clinicians should individualize prescription of therapeutic activities based on the patient's values, daily life participation, and functional activity needs. ( **Grade of Recommendation: C** ) 


####  Manual Therapy 


Clinicians should use manual therapy for patients with mild to moderate hip osteoarthritis and impairment of joint mobility, flexibility, and/or pain. Manual therapy may include thrust, nonthrust, and soft tissue mobilization. Doses and duration may range from 1 to 3 times per week over 6 to 12 weeks in patients with mild to moderate hip osteoarthritis. As hip motion improves, clinicians should add exercises including stretching and strengthening to augment and sustain gains in the patient's range of motion, flexibility, and strength. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


####  Flexibility, Strengthening, and Endurance Exercises 


Clinicians should use individualized flexibility, strengthening, and endurance exercises to address impairments in hip range of motion, specific muscle weaknesses, and limited thigh (hip) muscle flexibility. For group-based exercise programs, effort should be made to tailor exercises to address patients' most relevant physical impairments. Dosage and duration of treatment for effect should range from 1 to 5 times per week over 6 to 12 weeks in patients with mild to moderate hip osteoarthritis. ( **Grade of Recommendation: A** ) 


####  Modalities 


Clinicians may use ultrasound (1 MHz; 1 W/cm  2  for 5 minutes each to the anterior, lateral, and posterior hip for a total of 10 treatments over a 2-week period) in addition to exercise and hot packs in the short-term management of pain and activity limitation in individuals with hip osteoarthritis. ( **Grade of Recommendation: B** ) 


####  Bracing 


Clinicians should not use bracing as a first line of treatment. A brace may be used after exercise or manual therapies are unsuccessful in improving participation in activities that require turning/ pivoting for patients with mild to moderate hip osteoarthritis, especially in those with bilateral hip osteoarthritis. ( **Grade of Recommendation: F** ) 


####  Weight Loss 


In addition to providing exercise intervention, clinicians should collaborate with physicians, nutritionists, or dietitians to support weight reduction in individuals with hip osteoarthritis who are overweight or obese. ( **Grade of Recommendation: C** ) 


###  Definitions 


**Levels of Evidence** * 
<table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="3" summary="Table: Levels of Evidence">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Level
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Intervention/Prevention
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Pathoanatomic/Risk/Clinical Course/Prognosis/Differential Diagnosis
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Diagnosis/Diagnostic Accuracy
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Prevalence of Condition/Disorder
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Exam/Outcomes
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     I
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of high-quality RCTs
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality RCT
      <sup>
       †
      </sup>
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of prospective cohort studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality prospective cohort study
      <sup>
       ‡
      </sup>
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of high-quality diagnostic studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality diagnostic study
      <sup>
       §
      </sup>
      with validation
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR, high-quality cross-sectional studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality cross-sectional study
      <sup>
       ║
      </sup>
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of prospective cohort studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality prospective cohort study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     II
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of high-quality cohort studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality cohort study
      <sup>
       ‡
      </sup>
     </li>
     <li>
      Outcomes study or ecological study
     </li>
     <li>
      Lower-quality RCT
      <sup>
       ¶
      </sup>
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of retrospective cohort study
     </li>
     <li>
      Lower-quality prospective cohort study
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality retrospective cohort study
     </li>
     <li>
      Consecutive cohort
     </li>
     <li>
      Outcomes study or ecological study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of exploratory diagnostic studies or consecutive cohort studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality exploratory diagnostic studies
     </li>
     <li>
      Consecutive retrospective cohort
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of studies that allows relevant estimate
     </li>
     <li>
      Lower-quality cross-sectional study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SR of lower-quality prospective cohort studies
     </li>
     <li>
      Lower-quality prospective cohort study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     III
    </strong>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      SRs of case-control studies
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality case-control study
     </li>
     <li>
      Lower-quality cohort study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Lower-quality retrospective cohort study
     </li>
     <li>
      High-quality cross-sectional case-control study
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
     <li>
      Lower-quality exploratory diagnostic studies
     </li>
     <li>
      Nonconsecutive retrospective cohort
     </li>
    </ul>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Local nonrandom study
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    High-quality cross-sectional study
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     IV
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Case series
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Case series
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Case-control study
   </td>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    --
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Lower-quality cross-sectional study
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     V
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


Abbreviations: RCT, randomized clinical trial; SR, systematic review. 


*Adapted from Phillips B, Ball C, Sackett D, et al. Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine - Levels of Evidence (March 2009). Available at: [ http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025 ](http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025 "Center for Evidence Based Medicine Web site") . See also Appendix G in the original guideline document.   
†High quality includes RCTs with greater than 80% follow-up, blinding, and appropriate randomization procedures.   
‡High-quality cohort study includes greater than 80% follow-up.   
§High-quality diagnostic study includes consistently applied reference standard and blinding.   
║High-quality prevalence study is a cross-sectional study that uses a local and current random sample or censuses.   
¶Weaker diagnostic criteria and reference standards, improper randomization, no blinding, and less than 80% follow-up may add bias and threats to validity. 


####  Grades of Recommendation Based on Strength of Evidence 
<table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="3" summary="Table: Grades of Recommendation">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" colspan="2" scope="col" valign="top">
    Grades of Recommendation Based On
   </th>
   <th class="Center" scope="col" valign="top">
    Strength of Evidence
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    A
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Strong evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    A preponderance of level I and/or level II studies support the recommendation. This must include at least 1 level I study
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    B
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Moderate evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    A single high-quality randomized controlled trial or a preponderance of level II studies support the recommendation
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    C
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    A single level II study or a preponderance of level III and IV studies, including statements of consensus by content experts, support the recommendation
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    D
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Conflicting evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Higher-quality studies conducted on this topic disagree with respect to their conclusions. The recommendation is based on these conflicting studies
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    E
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Theoretical/foundational evidence
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    A preponderance of evidence from animal or cadaver studies, from conceptual models/principles, or from basic sciences/bench research support this conclusion
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="Center" valign="top">
    F
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Expert opinion
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Best practice based on the clinical experience of the guidelines development team
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Hip pain and mobility deficits associated with hip osteoarthritis

## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Evaluation
- Management
- Rehabilitation
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Geriatrics
- Orthopedic Surgery
- Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
- Rheumatology
- Sports Medicine

## Intended Users

- Health Care Providers
- Physical Therapists
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians
- Students
- Utilization Management

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To describe evidence-based physical therapy practice, including diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and assessment of outcomes for musculoskeletal disorders commonly managed by orthopaedic physical therapists 
  * To classify and define common musculoskeletal conditions using the World Health Organization's terminology related to impairments of body function and body structure, activity limitations, and participation restrictions 
  * To identify interventions supported by current best evidence to address impairments of body function and structure, activity limitations, and participation restrictions associated with common musculoskeletal conditions 
  * To identify appropriate outcome measures to assess changes resulting from physical therapy interventions in body function and structure as well as in activity and participation of these individuals 
  * To provide a description to policy makers, using internationally accepted terminology, of the practice of orthopaedic physical therapists 
  * To provide information for payers and claims reviewers regarding the practice of orthopaedic physical therapy for common musculoskeletal conditions 
  * To create a reference publication for orthopaedic physical therapy clinicians, academic instructors, clinical instructors, students, interns, residents, and fellows regarding the best current practice of orthopaedic physical therapy 



## Target Population



Adults with hip osteoarthritis

## Interventions and Practices Considered



 **Diagnosis**

  1. Diagnosis and classification according to International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD) criteria and International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) criteria 
  2. Differential diagnosis 
  3. Examination using validated outcome measures: activity limitation/self-report measures 
    * Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) pain subscale 
    * Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) 
    * Pressure pain threshold (PPT) 
    * Pain visual analog scale (VAS) 
    * WOMAC physical function subscale 
    * Hip disability and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (HOOS) 
    * Lower Extremity Functional Scale (FEFS) 
    * Harris Hip Score (HHS) 
  4. Examination using activity limitation and physical performance measures 
    * 6-minute walk 
    * 30-second chair stand 
    * Stair measure 
    * Timed up-and-go tests 
    * Self-paced walk 
    * Timed single-leg stance 
    * 4-square step test 
    * Step test 
  5. Examination using physical impairment measures (i.e., flexion, abduction, and external rotation [FABER or Patrick's] test and passive hip range of motion and hip muscle strength, including internal rotation, external rotation, flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction) 
  6. Fall risk management 



**Management/Treatment**

  1. Patient education 
  2. Functional, gait, and balance training 
  3. Manual therapy (including thrust, nonthrust, and soft tissue mobilization) 
  4. Flexibility, strengthening, and endurance exercises 
  5. Ultrasound 
  6. Bracing 
  7. Weight reduction support 



## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Hip pain 
  * Body function impairment 
  * Activity limitation 
  * Participation restriction 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



The authors of this guideline revision worked with research librarians with expertise in systematic review to perform a systematic search for hip osteoarthritis (OA) articles published since 2008 related to classification, examination, and intervention strategies, consistent with previous guideline development methods related to International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) classification. Briefly, the following databases were searched from 2008 to 2016: MEDLINE (PubMed; 2008-2016), CINAHL (EBSCO; 2008-date), PEDro (EBSCO; 2008-date), and the Cochrane Library (Wiley; 2008-date). See Appendix A in the original guideline document for full search strategies and Appendix B for search dates and results.

Articles contributing to recommendations were reviewed based on specified inclusion and exclusion criteria, with the goal of identifying evidence relevant to physical therapist clinical decision making for adults with hip OA. The title and abstract of each article were reviewed independently by 2 members of the clinical practice guideline (CPG) development team for inclusion. See Appendix C in the original guideline document for inclusion and exclusion criteria. Full-text review was then similarly conducted to obtain the final set of articles for contribution to recommendations. The team leader provided the final decision for discrepancies that were not resolved by the review team. For selected relevant topics that were not appropriate for the development of recommendations, such as incidence and imaging, articles were gathered, reviewed, and synthesized but were not subject to a formal systematic review process and were not included in the flow chart. Evidence tables for this CPG are available on the Clinical Practice Guidelines page of the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) Web site ([www.orthopt.org](http://www.orthopt.org "Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association \(APTA\) Web site ")). 

## Number of Source Documents



  * Assessment n = 22 
  * Intervention n = 27 



Refer to Appendix D in the original guideline document for flow charts of articles and Appendix E for articles included in recommendations by topic.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Levels of Evidence</span></strong>*</p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="3" cellpadding="5" summary="Table: Levels of Evidence">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Level</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Intervention/Prevention</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Pathoanatomic/Risk/Clinical Course/Prognosis/Differential Diagnosis</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Diagnosis/Diagnostic Accuracy</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Prevalence of Condition/Disorder</th>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="col">Exam/Outcomes</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>I</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of high-quality RCTs </li>
                <li>High-quality RCT<sup>&dagger;</sup> </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of prospective cohort studies </li>
                <li>High-quality prospective cohort study<sup>&Dagger;</sup> </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of high-quality diagnostic studies </li>
                <li>High-quality diagnostic study<sup>&sect;</sup> with validation </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR, high-quality cross-sectional studies </li>
                <li>High-quality cross-sectional study<sup>║ </sup></li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of prospective cohort studies </li>
                <li>High-quality prospective cohort study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>II</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of high-quality cohort studies </li>
                <li>High-quality cohort study<sup>&Dagger;</sup> </li>
                <li>Outcomes study or ecological study </li>
                <li>Lower-quality RCT<sup>&para;</sup> </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of retrospective cohort study </li>
                <li>Lower-quality prospective cohort study </li>
                <li>High-quality retrospective cohort study </li>
                <li>Consecutive cohort </li>
                <li>Outcomes study or ecological study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of exploratory diagnostic studies or consecutive cohort studies </li>
                <li>High-quality exploratory diagnostic studies </li>
                <li>Consecutive retrospective cohort </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of studies that allows relevant estimate </li>
                <li>Lower-quality cross-sectional study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SR of lower-quality prospective cohort studies </li>
                <li>Lower-quality prospective cohort study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>III </strong></td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>SRs of case-control studies </li>
                <li>High-quality case-control study </li>
                <li>Lower-quality cohort study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>Lower-quality retrospective cohort study </li>
                <li>High-quality cross-sectional case-control study </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
            <ul style="list-style-type: disc;">
                <li>Lower-quality exploratory diagnostic studies </li>
                <li>Nonconsecutive retrospective cohort </li>
            </ul>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">Local nonrandom study</td>
            <td valign="top">High-quality cross-sectional study</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>IV</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">Case series</td>
            <td valign="top">Case series</td>
            <td valign="top">Case-control study</td>
            <td class="Center" valign="top">--</td>
            <td valign="top">Lower-quality cross-sectional study</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>V</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">Expert opinion</td>
            <td valign="top">Expert opinion</td>
            <td valign="top">Expert opinion</td>
            <td valign="top">Expert opinion</td>
            <td valign="top">Expert opinion</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p class="Note">Abbreviations: RCT, randomized clinical trial; SR, systematic review. </p>
<p class="Note">*Adapted from Phillips B, Ball C, Sackett D, et al. Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine - Levels of Evidence (March 2009). Available at: <a href="http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025" title="Center for Evidence Based Medicine Web site">http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025</a>. See also Appendix G in the original guideline document.<br />
&dagger;High quality includes RCTs with greater than 80% follow-up, blinding, and appropriate randomization procedures.<br />
&Dagger;High-quality cohort study includes greater than 80% follow-up.<br />
&sect;High-quality diagnostic study includes consistently applied reference standard and blinding.<br />
║High-quality prevalence study is a cross-sectional study that uses a local and current random sample or censuses.<br />
&para;Weaker diagnostic criteria and reference standards, improper randomization, no blinding, and less than 80% follow-up may add bias and threats to validity.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

 **Levels of Evidence**

Individual clinical research articles were graded according to criteria adapted from the Centre for Evidence-based Medicine (Oxford, United Kingdom) for diagnostic, prospective, and therapeutic studies. In teams of 2, each reviewer independently assigned a level of evidence and evaluated the quality of each article using a critical appraisal tool. See the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of Evidence" field for a levels of evidence table and Appendix G in the original guideline document for details on procedures used for assigning levels of evidence. The evidence update was organized from highest level of evidence to lowest level.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Content experts were appointed by the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) to conduct a review of the literature and to develop an updated hip osteoarthritis (OA) clinical practice guideline (CPG) as indicated by the current state of the evidence in the field. The aims of the revision were to provide a concise summary of the evidence since publication in 2009 of the original guidelines, and to develop new recommendations or revise previously published recommendations to support evidence-based practice. 

**Grades of Evidence**

The strength of the evidence supporting the recommendations was graded according to the previously established methods for the 2009 guideline and those provided in the original guideline document. Each team developed recommendations based on the strength of evidence, including how directly the studies addressed the question of hip pain and hip osteoarthritis (OA). In developing their recommendations, the authors considered the strengths and limitations of the body of evidence and the health benefits, side effects, and risks of tests and interventions.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Grades of Recommendation Based on Strength of Evidence**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Grades of Recommendation Based On
</th>  
<th>

Strength of Evidence
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

A
</td>  
<td>

Strong evidence
</td>  
<td>

A preponderance of level I and/or level II studies support the recommendation. This must include at least 1 level I study
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

B
</td>  
<td>

Moderate evidence
</td>  
<td>

A single high-quality randomized controlled trial or a preponderance of level II studies support the recommendation
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

C
</td>  
<td>

Weak evidence
</td>  
<td>

A single level II study or a preponderance of level III and IV studies, including statements of consensus by content experts, support the recommendation
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

D
</td>  
<td>

Conflicting evidence
</td>  
<td>

Higher-quality studies conducted on this topic disagree with respect to their conclusions. The recommendation is based on these conflicting studies
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

E
</td>  
<td>

Theoretical/foundational evidence
</td>  
<td>

A preponderance of evidence from animal or cadaver studies, from conceptual models/principles, or from basic sciences/bench research support this conclusion
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

F
</td>  
<td>

Expert opinion
</td>  
<td>

Best practice based on the clinical experience of the guidelines development team
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



One research group conducted an economic evaluation of the randomized controlled trial (RCT) conducted by another group of patients who met the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for hip osteoarthritis (OA) using 1-year outcomes. Manual therapy, exercise therapy, and combined manual and exercise therapy provided gains in quality-adjusted life-years compared to usual medical care. From the societal perspective, manual therapy was cost saving compared to usual care, and exercise therapy was cost-effective. Using either exercise or manual therapy was more cost-effective than the combination of the 2. The 1-year time frame is an important limitation of this study because gains sustained over time would increase cost-effectiveness.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review
- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



 **Guideline Review Process and Validation**

Identified reviewers who are experts in hip osteoarthritis (OA) management and rehabilitation reviewed the clinical practice guideline (CPG) draft for integrity, accuracy, and to ensure that it fully represents the current evidence for the condition. The guideline draft was also posted for public comment and review on [www.orthopt.org](https://www.orthopt.org "Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association \(APTA\) Web site"), and a notification of this posting was sent to the members of the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA). In addition, a panel of consumer/patient representatives and external stakeholders, such as claims reviewers, medical coding experts, academic educators, clinical educators, physician specialists, and researchers, also reviewed the guideline. All comments, suggestions, and feedback from the expert reviewers, the public, and consumer/patient representatives were provided to the authors and editors for consideration and revisions. Guideline-development methods, policies, and implementation processes are reviewed at least yearly by the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA's International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF)-based Clinical Practice Guideline Advisory Panel, including consumer/patient representatives, external stakeholders, and experts in physical therapy practice guideline methodology. 

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Improvement in scores on validated outcome measurement scales

Refer to the "Evidence Update" section in the original guideline document for specific benefits of the interventions. 

## Potential Harms



Refer to the "Evidence Update" sections of the original guideline document for specific harms of interventions.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



 **Statement of Intent**

These guidelines are not intended to be construed or to serve as a standard of medical care. Standards of care are determined on the basis of all clinical data available for an individual patient and are subject to change as scientific knowledge and technology advance and patterns of care evolve. These parameters of practice should be considered guidelines only. Adherence to them will not ensure a successful outcome in every patient, nor should they be construed as including all proper methods of care or excluding other acceptable methods of care aimed at the same results. The ultimate judgment regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan must be made based on clinician experience and expertise in light of the clinical presentation of the patient, the available evidence, available diagnostic and treatment options, and the patient's values, expectations, and preferences. However, it is suggested that significant departures from accepted guidelines should be documented in the patient's medical records at the time the relevant clinical decision is made.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



 **Dissemination and Implementation Tools**

In addition to publishing these guidelines in the _Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy_ ( _JOSPT_ ), these guidelines will be posted on clinical practice guideline (CPG) areas of both the _JOSPT_ and Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) Web sites, which are free-access Web site areas, and submitted to be available as free access on the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Web site ([www.guideline.gov](http://www.guideline.gov "National Guideline Clearinghouse Web site")). The implementation tools planned to be available for patients, clinicians, educators, payers, policy makers, and researchers, and the associated implementation strategies are listed in the original guideline document.

## Implementation Tools

- Resources

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cibulka MT, Bloom NJ, Enseki KR, Macdonald CW, Woehrle J, McDonough CM. Hip pain and mobility deficits-hip osteoarthritis: revision 2017. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2017 Jun;47(6):A1-A37. [77 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=28566053 )

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2017 Jun

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Physical Therapy Association, Inc., The Orthopaedic Section - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



The Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA), Inc.

## Guideline Committee



Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) Development Team

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Michael T. Cibulka, DPT, MHS, Associate Professor, Physical Therapy Program, Maryville University, St Louis, MO; Nancy J. Bloom, DPT, MSOT, Associate Professor, Physical Therapy and Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Keelan R. Enseki, PT, MS, Physical Therapy Orthopaedic, Residency Program Director, Centers for Rehab Services, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Center for Sports Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA; Cameron W. MacDonald, PT, DPT, Assistant Professor, School of Physical Therapy, Regis University Denver, CO; Judy Woehrle, PT, PhD, Professor, Physical Therapy Program, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ; Christine M. McDonough, PT, PhD, ICF-Based Clinical Practice, Guidelines Editor, Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc, La Crosse, WI and Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH and Research Assistant Professor, Health and Disability Research Institute, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA

_Reviewers_ : Roy Altman, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; John Dewitt, DPT, Director, Physical Therapy Sports and Orthopaedic Residencies, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Amanda Ferland, DPT, Clinical Faculty, Intech Rehabilitation Group/Division of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, Orthopaedic Physical Therapy Residency, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA and Spine Rehabilitation Fellowship, Beijing, China; Marcie Harris-Hayes, DPT, MSCI, Associate Professor, Physical Therapy and Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; M. Elizabeth Hammond, MD, Consultant Pathologist, Intermountain Healthcare and Professor of Pathology-Emerita, University of Utah School of Medicine and Adjunct Professor of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT; Sandra Kaplan, PT, PhD, Clinical Practice Guidelines Coordinator, Academy of Pediatric Physical Therapy, APTA, Inc, Alexandria, VA and Professor, Doctoral Programs in Physical Therapy, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ; Heather Stone Keelty, DPT, Director of Professional Development, San Francisco Sport and Spine Physical Therapy, San Francisco, CA; David Killoran, PhD, Patient/Consumer Representative for the ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc, La Crosse, WI and Professor Emeritus, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA; Leslie Torburn, DPT, Principal and Consultant, Silhouette Consulting, Inc, Sacramento, CA; Douglas M. White, DPT, Milton Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy, PC, Milton, MA

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The authors declared relationships and developed a conflict management plan, which included submitting a conflict-of-interest form to the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA). Articles that were authored by a reviewer were assigned to an alternate reviewer. Funding was provided to the CPG development team for travel and expenses for clinical practice guideline (CPG) development training. The CPG development team maintained editorial independence.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Cibulka MT, White DM, Woehrle J, Harris-Hayes M, Enseki K, Fagerson TL, Slover J, Godges JJ. Hip pain and mobility deficits--hip osteoarthritis: clinical practice guidelines linked to the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health from the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2009 Apr;39(4):A1-25. [216 references].

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Physical Therapy Association, Inc., Orthopedic Section Web site](https://www.orthopt.org/uploads/content_files/files/Hip%20OA%20Revision%202017.pdf "American Physical Therapy Association, Inc., Orthopedic Section Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available: 

  * Hip pain, mobility deficits, osteoarthritis: clinical practice guidelines revision 2017. Decision tree. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2017 Jun; 47(6). Available from the [American Physical Therapy Association (APTA), Inc., Orthopedic Section Web site](https://www.orthopt.org/uploads/content_files/files/Hip%20OA%20Revision%20Decision%20Tree%202017%20-%20Ortho%20Section.pdf "American Physical Therapy Association, Inc., Orthopedic Section Web site"). 
  * APTA clinical practice guideline process manual. Alexandria (VA): American Physical Therapy Association (APTA); 2018. 63 p. Available from the [APTA Web site](http://www.apta.org/uploadedFiles/APTAorg/Practice_and_Patient_Care/Evidence_and_Research/Evidence_Tools/Components_of_EBP/CPGs/APTACPGManual2018.pdf "APTA Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 23, 2010. The information was verified by the guideline developer on May 9, 2010. This NGC summary was updated by ECRI Institute on March 19, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 6, 2018. 

This NEATS assessment was completed by ECRI Institute on March 14, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 6, 2018. 

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

