---
title: "Risk of acute hyponatremia in hospitalized children and youth receiving maintenance intravenous fluids."
id: 9957
permalink: /:collection/9957
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Risk of acute hyponatremia in hospitalized children and youth receiving maintenance intravenous fluids.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Friedman JN, Canadian Paediatric Society, Acute Care Committee. Risk of acute hyponatremia in hospitalized children and youth receiving maintenance intravenous fluids. Paediatr Child Health. 2013 Feb;18(2):102-4. [30 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The following recommendations apply to the prescription of intravenous (IV) maintenance fluids in children one month corrected age to 18 years of age, excluding patients with renal or cardiac disease, diabetic ketoacidosis, severe burns or other underlying conditions that significantly affect electrolyte regulation. 


####  General Principles 


  1. Any child in hospital who requires IV fluids should be considered at risk for developing hyponatremia due to increased risk of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion. At particular risk are: 
    * Children undergoing surgery 
    * Children with acute neurological or respiratory infections (e.g., meningitis, encephalitis, pneumonia and bronchiolitis) 
  2. Oral fluids are generally very low in Na content (hypotonic). Where the total fluid intake (TFI) is a combination of oral and IV fluids, both need to be accounted for. 
  3. Because infants and young children have limited glycogen stores, dextrose should be part of the IV maintenance fluid prescription (e.g., 5% dextrose in water and 0.9% NaCl [D5W.0.9%NaCl] or 5% dextrose in water and 0.45% NaCl [D5W.0.45%NaCl]) if no other source of glucose is provided. 
  4. The approach to prescribing IV fluids should be as cautious as that for medications, with close attention paid to indications, monitoring, the type of fluid and the volume/rate of administration. 




####  Monitoring 


  1. Baseline serum electrolytes (Na, K, glucose, urea, creatinine) should be measured when starting IV fluid therapy in hospitalized children. 
  2. Children receiving maintenance IV fluids should have their serum electrolytes checked regularly, with patients who may be at high risk of impaired renal water excretion checked daily if not more frequently. 
  3. All children receiving IV maintenance fluids should have their intake/output carefully monitored, as well as a daily weight measurement. 
  4. Clinicians should be aware of the symptoms of hyponatremia, which may include headache, nausea and vomiting, decrease in level of consciousness, seizures and apnea. 




####  Prescription of IV fluids for Maintenance Requirements 


  1. In children whose serum sodium is normal at baseline but who are considered to be at particularly high risk of ADH secretion (e.g., peri- or postoperative; with respiratory or neurological infections) the use of isotonic saline (D5W.0.9%NaCl) is recommended. 
  2. For other hospitalized children whose serum sodium is normal, the options are D5W.0.9%NaCl or D5W.0.45%NaCl. The first option is preferred, especially when the serum Na is in the low normal range (135 mmol/L to 137 mmol/L inclusive). 
  3. Hypotonic IV fluids containing <0.45% NaCl should not be used to provide routine fluid maintenance and should not be generally available on paediatric wards. 
  4. When serum electrolyte results are not yet available, it is recommended that D5W.0.9% NaCl be initiated as the maintenance IV fluid. 
  5. If the serum sodium is 145 mmol/L to 154 mmol/L, then D5W.0.45% NaCl should be initiated and frequent monitoring of the serum sodium performed. 
  6. Ringer's lactate is commonly used in the operating room but the absence of dextrose and presence of lactate make it generally inappropriate for maintenance IV therapy, especially in young children. 




####  Intravenous (IV) Fluid Maintenance Recommendations Based on Plasma Na+ Level 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Intravenous (IV) Fluid Maintenance Recommendations Based on Plasma Na+ Level">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Children One Month–18 Years of Age
   </th>
   <th valign="top">
    Recommended IV Fluid
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Na &lt;138 mmol/L
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Isotonic IV solutions
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Na 138 mmol/ –144 mmol/L
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Isotonic IV solutions preferred; half-isotonic solutions may be used
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Perioperative period
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Isotonic IV solutions
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


Note that these recommendations are not intended for use in infants and youth outside the one month to 18 year age group. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Hospital-acquired acute hyponatremia

## Guideline Category

- Evaluation
- Management
- Prevention
- Risk Assessment
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Critical Care
- Pediatrics

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To outline current understanding of the problem of hospital-acquired acute hyponatremia and summarize recent research dealing with this issue

## Target Population



Any child one month corrected age to 18 years of age in hospital who requires intravenous (IV) fluids and is at risk for developing hyponatremia due to increased risk of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion

**Note** : Patients with renal or cardiac disease, diabetic ketoacidosis, severe burns or other underlying conditions that significantly affect electrolyte regulation are excluded.

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Determining level of risk of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion in hospitalized children 
  2. Use of dextrose as part of the intravenous (IV) maintenance fluid prescription 
  3. Use of caution in prescribing IV fluids, with close attention paid to indications, monitoring, the type of fluid and the volume/rate of administration 
  4. Measurement of baseline serum electrolytes (Na, K, glucose, urea, creatinine) when starting IV fluid therapy 
  5. Regular monitoring of serum electrolytes as well as intake/outtake in children receiving maintenance IV fluids 
  6. Clinician awareness of the symptoms of hyponatremia 
  7. Use of isotonic saline (5% dextrose in water and 0.9% sodium chloride [D5W.0.9%NaCl]) in children at increased risk of ADH secretion 
  8. Use of half-isotonic saline (5% dextrose in water and 0.45% NaCl [D5W.0.45%NaCl]) 
  9. Avoiding hypotonic IV fluids containing <0.45% NaCl to provide routine fluid maintenance 
  10. Ringer's lactate (not generally recommended for routine fluid maintenance) 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Serum Na level 
  * Risk of hyponatremia 
  * Risk of hypernatremia 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



A selective review of the relevant literature up until 2012 using PubMed was conducted. Specific search terms were not used; the author mainly looked at randomized controlled trials (RCTs) studying different intravenous (IV) maintenance fluids and their outcomes regarding acute hyponatremia, but some case control studies were also reviewed. Guidelines from various institutions and organizations were also incorporated.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Subjective Review

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>Not applicable</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



Not applicable

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This practice point has been reviewed by the Canadian Peadiatric Society's Community Peadiatrics Committee.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of evidence supporting the recommendations is not specifically stated.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



  * Appropriate prescription of intravenous (IV) maintenance fluids in hospitalized children one month to 18 years of age to avoid acute hyponatremia 
  * Recent studies suggest that, compared with hypotonic IV maintenance fluids, isotonic fluids decrease the risk of iatrogenic acute hyponatremia without significant side effects. 



## Potential Harms



Normal saline contains 154 mmol/L of Na, which is isotonic with respect to the cell membrane. This suggestion has raised concerns regarding the potential for hypernatremia and salt and water overload. However, unless the child has an impaired ability to excrete Na, a renal concentrating defect, significant water loss or prolonged fluid restriction, these risks appear to be largely theoretical. The risk of developing hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis has been recognized in the context of rapid isotonic saline infusion delivered perioperatively but has not been reported in the trials of intravenous saline used for maintenance requirements in children to date.

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



The recommendations in this position statement do not indicate an exclusive course of treatment or procedure to be followed. Variations, taking into account individual circumstances, may be appropriate. Internet addresses are current at time of publication.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Safety

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Friedman JN, Canadian Paediatric Society, Acute Care Committee. Risk of acute hyponatremia in hospitalized children and youth receiving maintenance intravenous fluids. Paediatr Child Health. 2013 Feb;18(2):102-4. [30 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Feb

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Canadian Paediatric Society - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



Canadian Paediatric Society

## Guideline Committee



Acute Care Committee

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Principal Author_ : Jeremy N Friedman

_Committee Members_ : Laurel Chauvin-Kimoff MD ( _Chair_ ); Isabelle M Chevalier MD ( _Board Representative_ ); Catherine A Farrell MD; Jeremy N Friedman MD; Angelo Mikrogianakis MD ( _Past Chair_ ); Oliva Ortiz-Alvarez MD

_Liaisons_ : Dominic Allain MD, CPS Paediatric Emergency Medicine Section; Marilyn Monk, Canadian Association of Paediatric Health Centres; Jennifer Walton MD, CPS Hospital Paediatrics Section

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Not stated

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Canadian Paediatric Society Web site](http://www.cps.ca/en/documents/position/acute-hyponatremia-in-hospitalized-children-and-youth "Canadian Paediatric Society Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



None available

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on September 25, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

