---
title: "Guideline for the treatment of breakthrough and the prevention of refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in children with cancer."
id: 11062
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Guideline for the treatment of breakthrough and the prevention of refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in children with cancer.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Flank J, Robinson PD, Holdsworth M, Phillips R, Portwine C, Gibson P, Maan C, Stefin N, Sung L, Dupuis LL. Guideline for the treatment of breakthrough and the prevention of refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in children with cancer. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2016 Jul;63(7):1144-51. [39 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26960036)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Strength of recommendations ( **Strong, Weak** ) and quality of evidence ( **High, Moderate, Low, Very Low** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Health question #1: What interventions are recommended to treat breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children? 


#####  Breakthrough CINV is defined as nausea and/or vomiting presumed to be attributable to antineoplastic chemotherapy and with no other pathological cause that occurs during the acute or delayed phase despite CINV prophylaxis. 


####  Recommendations 


  * _Recommendation 1.1_ : For children receiving acute CINV prophylaxis recommended for minimally, low, or moderately emetogenic chemotherapy, clinicians should upgrade or escalate the acute CINV prophylaxis provided to that recommended for chemotherapy of the next higher level of emetogenic risk. ( **Strong Recommendation, Very Low Quality Evidence** ) 
  * _Recommendation 1.2_ : For children receiving acute CINV prophylaxis recommended for highly emetogenic chemotherapy, the Guideline Panel suggests that olanzapine be added to guideline-consistent CINV prophylaxis. ( **Weak Recommendation, Low Quality Evidence** ) 
  * _Recommendation 1.3_ : For children receiving acute CINV prophylaxis recommended for highly emetogenic chemotherapy and who cannot receive olanzapine, the Guideline Panel suggests that one of the following antiemetic agents be added to guideline-consistent CINV prophylaxis: 
    * Methotrimeprazine (also known as levomepromazine) or 
    * Metoclopramide (in children older than 1 year) 

( **Weak Recommendation, Very Low Quality Evidence** ) 





Given the possibility of extrapyramidal reactions with these agents, the risks and benefits of their use should be weighed carefully and coadministration of prophylaxis aimed at preventing extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) should be considered. Patients and families should also be educated about the possible occurrence of EPS. 


###  Health question #2: What interventions are recommended to prevent CINV in children who have refractory CINV? 


#####  Refractory CINV is defined as nausea and/or vomiting presumed to be attributable to antineoplastic chemotherapy and with no other pathological cause which occurs during the acute or delayed phase despite CINV prophylaxis in patients who have experienced breakthrough CINV in a previous chemotherapy block. 


####  Recommendations 


  * _Recommendation 2.1_ : For children receiving acute CINV prophylaxis recommended for minimally, low, or moderately emetogenic chemotherapy, clinicians should upgrade or escalate the acute CINV prophylaxis provided to that recommended for chemotherapy of the next higher level of emetogenic risk. ( **Strong Recommendation, Very Low Quality Evidence** ) 
  * _Recommendation 2.2_ : For children receiving acute CINV prophylaxis recommended for highly emetogenic chemotherapy, the Guideline Panel suggests that the 5-HT3 (serotonin) antagonist given for CINV prophylaxis be changed from ondansetron or granisetron to palonosetron. In jurisdictions where palonosetron is not available, the Guideline Panel suggests that granisetron be substituted for ondansetron. ( **Weak Recommendation, Very Low Quality of Evidence** ) 
  * _Recommendation 2.3_ : For children experiencing refractory CINV despite initiation of previous recommendations and who have not previously received aprepitant because it is known or suspected to interact with the chemotherapeutic agent(s) being given, the Guideline Panel suggests that the addition of aprepitant to acute CINV prophylaxis be considered. ( **Weak Recommendation, Low Quality Evidence** ) 
  * _Recommendation 2.4_ : For children experiencing refractory CINV despite initiation of the previous recommendations, the Guideline Panel suggests that one of the following interventions be added to the CINV prophylaxis provided: 
    * Interventions that were employed successfully for the treatment of breakthrough CINV in previous treatment blocks (olanzapine, methotrimeprazine or metoclopramide) ( **Weak Recommendation, Very Low Quality Evidence** ); or 
    * Stimulation of Nei Gaun (P6) by means of acupressure or electroacupuncture ( **Weak Recommendation, Very Low Quality Evidence** ) 




###  Definitions 


####  Quality of Evidence 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    High Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    Moderate Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    Low Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    Very Low Quality
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  Strength of Recommendations 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: Strength of Recommendations">
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
    Strong Recommendation
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    When using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE), panels make strong recommendations when they are confident that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" valign="top">
    Weak Recommendation
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak recommendations indicate that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the panel is less confident.
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Breakthrough and refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV)

## Guideline Category

- Prevention
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Oncology
- Pediatrics
- Preventive Medicine

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To optimize breakthrough and refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) control in children

**Note** : For the purpose of this guideline, optimal control of breakthrough CINV is defined as acute relief of nausea or vomiting during the current chemotherapy block. Optimal control of refractory CINV is defined as no vomiting, no retching, no nausea, no use of antiemetic agents other than those given for CINV prevention, and no nausea-related change in the child's usual appetite and diet.

## Target Population



Children aged 1 month to 18 years receiving chemotherapy

## Interventions and Practices Considered



 **Treatment**

  1. Upgrading or escalating acute chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) prophylaxis 
  2. Addition of olanzapine to guideline-consistent CINV prophylaxis 
  3. Addition of methotrimeprazine (also known as levomepromazine) to guideline-consistent CINV prophylaxis 
  4. Addition of metoclopramide (in children older than 1 year) to guideline-consistent CINV prophylaxis 
  5. Educating patients and families about extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) 



**Prevention**

  1. Upgrading or escalating acute CINV prophylaxis 
  2. Changing from ondansetron or granisetron to palonosetron 
  3. Addition of aprepitant to acute CINV prophylaxis 
  4. Addition of olanzapine, methotrimeprazine or metoclopramide 
  5. Stimulation of Nei Gaun (P6) by means of acupressure or electroacupuncture 



## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Proportion of patients experiencing complete control of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in refractory patients 
  * Response to the first dose of the breakthrough treatment (ideally within the first 24 hr after administration) described as a proportion of patients experiencing complete control or/and during the remainder of the phase in question (acute/delayed) 
  * Adverse effects associated with the use of antiemetics 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Systematic Literature Searches**

In March 2015, computerized searches (see Supplementary Table SI [see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field]) were performed with the assistance of a library scientist to identify guidelines that could be endorsed for the treatment of breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) and for the prevention of refractory CINV in children. A total of 4,451 citations were identified and screened. Since none met the inclusion criteria (see Table II in the original guideline document) for endorsement assessment, the guideline panel proceeded to develop a _de novo_ guideline. Systematic reviews of primary studies evaluating interventions for the treatment of breakthrough CINV and the prevention of refractory CINV were conducted.

**Evidence Identification and Synthesis**

The Guideline Development Group searched for primary studies pertinent to the guideline topics (see Supplementary Tables SII and SIII [see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field]) as of March 13, 2015. Eligibility was not restricted by age or language. All primary study designs, except single case reports, were eligible. Citations were screened independently by two reviewers. Conflicts were resolved by a third. Potentially relevant citations were included for full-text screening. Two reviewers independently evaluated the full-text papers to determine whether they met the inclusion criteria (see Table II in the original guideline document). Disagreements were resolved by a third reviewer.

During the guideline development process, it became apparent that understanding the safety of specific medications in children with cancer was required to better inform recommendations. Therefore, systematic reviews evaluating the safety of metoclopramide and prochlorperazine were undertaken, and an existing systematic review of the safety of olanzapine in children was considered by the panel. Primary studies relating to the safety of methotrimeprazine in children were also searched (see Supplementary Table SIII [see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field]) as of March 9, 2015 with the assistance of a library scientist. Citations were screened, full-text papers were evaluated to determine if they met the inclusion criteria (see Table II in the original guideline document).

## Number of Source Documents



A total of 4,654 references were identified from the database searches. Of these, 116 papers were reviewed in full text and 59 (breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting [CINV]: 13; refractory CINV: 46) satisfied the eligibility criteria (see Figure 1 in the original guideline document for a flowchart of the literature identification process) and were included in the systematic review.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Quality of Evidence</span></strong> </p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: Quality of Evidence">
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row">High Quality</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row">Moderate Quality</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row">Low Quality</th>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row">Very Low Quality</th>
            <td valign="top">Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Evidence summary tables were compiled. See the supplementary materials (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **Health Questions**

The guideline sought to answer the following health questions:

  1. What interventions are recommended to treat breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children? 
  2. What interventions are recommended to prevent CINV in children who have refractory CINV? 



**Guideline Panel and Development of Clinical Questions**

Guideline panel members were chosen to represent inter-professional staff from Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario centers and from internationally recognized experts in pediatric supportive care. Once chosen, the panel members developed the specific health questions (see above) to be addressed by this guideline.

**Evidence Synthesis**

Decisions were taken through panel discussions; any differences in opinion were resolved by consensus. The quality of evidence and strength of recommendations were assessed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system. In formulating recommendations, health benefits, adverse effects, and risks were explicitly considered.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Strength of Recommendations**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Strong Recommendation
</th>  
<td>

When using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE), panels make strong recommendations when they are confident that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

Weak Recommendation
</th>  
<td>

Weak recommendations indicate that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the panel is less confident.
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- External Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



 **External Review and Consultation Process**

The draft guideline underwent a two-stage external review: first by international experts in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) and then by stakeholders from the Ontario pediatric oncology community. Six content experts provided a review; their comments were discussed in detail by the panel and a decision on each point was taken by consensus. Ten Ontario pediatric oncology stakeholders also provided comments. These identified the need to develop guideline implementation tools.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Optimized the control of breakthrough and refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in children

## Potential Harms



  * No clinically significant adverse effects were reported in either study that evaluated olanzapine for the treatment of breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in adults. Dizziness, fatigue, and dyspepsia, described as mild and tolerable, were reported in one study. 
  * In a systematic review and meta-analysis, weight gain and sedation (78% [95% confidence interval (CI): 63% to 95%] and 48% [95% CI: 35% to 67%], respectively) were commonly associated with the use of olanzapine in children less than 13 years old. Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and electrocardiograph abnormalities were reported less frequently (9% [95% CI: 4% to 21%] and 14% [95% CI: 7% to 26%], respectively). Most adverse effects associated with olanzapine use were of minor clinical significance; no fatalities attributable to olanzapine were identified. 
  * In one study, drowsiness, dry mouth, and constipation were the most commonly reported adverse effects of methotrimeprazine in adult psychiatric patients in one study. Sedation (12/32 patients), hypotension (8/32), and induration at the site of methotrimeprazine administration (32/32) were the most commonly reported adverse effects experienced by patients included in that study. 
  * Four studies (two retrospective reviews, one case series, and one case report) involving 30 children were included in a systematic review of the safety of methotrimeprazine in children (see Supplementary Table SV [see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field]). No persistent adverse effects or fatalities were attributable to methotrimeprazine in these studies. 
  * In a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of adverse effects of metoclopramide in children, the mean proportion of children reported to have EPS was 9% (95% CI: 5% to 17%) or diarrhea was 6% (95% CI: 3% to 9%). In single dose and multiple-dose metoclopramide studies, the mean proportion of children reported to experience sedation was 2% (95% CI: 1% to 5%) and 6% (95% CI: 3% to 12%), respectively. 
  * The most commonly reported adverse effects of palonosetron reported by patients in one study were constipation and anxiety; no patient experienced severe toxicity. 
  * Aprepitant is a cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) substrate and an inhibitor of cytochrome P450 2C9/8 (CYP2C9/8) and cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19). As a result, it may potentially interact with medications, including chemotherapy, metabolized via these pathways. Interactions with chemotherapy that may lead to an increased risk of short- and long-term toxicity are of primary concern. 
  * The potential improvement in CINV control offered by the addition of aprepitant should be weighed against the short- and long-term toxicities resulting from potential interactions with chemotherapy. It is essential to include the patient, when appropriate, and family in this discussion so their values can be incorporated into the decision-making process. The relative risks of aprepitant (potential for drug interaction with chemotherapy and altered chemotherapy exposure) and benefits (CINV control) should be determined on a case-by-case basis. 



# Contraindications

## Contraindications


  * Olanzapine should be avoided in patients receiving cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, rifampin) or inhibitors (e.g. ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine) as olanzapine is primarily metabolized via this enzymatic pathway. 
  * Since Health Canada and the European Medicines Agency have recently issued warnings regarding the risk of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) in young children receiving metoclopramide, the panel recommends that metoclopramide be avoided in children less than 1-year old. 



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



These recommendations are based on a systematic review of the literature. However, there are many gaps in the available evidence. Optimization of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) control in children requires delivery of care based on the best available evidence and the prospective evaluation of both new and old antiemetic agents.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Flank J, Robinson PD, Holdsworth M, Phillips R, Portwine C, Gibson P, Maan C, Stefin N, Sung L, Dupuis LL. Guideline for the treatment of breakthrough and the prevention of refractory chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in children with cancer. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2016 Jul;63(7):1144-51. [39 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=26960036)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2016 Jul

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



This work was supported by the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario, Ministry of Health and Long Term Care, Ontario; Garron Family Comprehensive Cancer Centre (JF); and the Children's Oncology Group (DR, LLD, and LS). This support did not influence the interpretation of the results of this work.

## Guideline Committee



Guideline Panel

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Guideline Panel Members_ : Jacqueline Flank, BScPhm, ACPR, MSc, Department of Pharmacy, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Paula D. Robinson, MD, MSc, Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario, Toronto, Canada; Mark Holdsworth, PharmD, College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico; Robert Phillips, MD, Regional Department of Haematology and Oncology, Leeds Children's Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York, United Kingdom Carol Portwine, MD, FRCPC, PhD, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada; Paul Gibson, MD, Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Canada; Cathy Maan, PhD, CPsych, Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Canada; Nancy Stefin, Hons BA, CLSt Dipl, CCLS, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada; Lillian Sung, MD, PhD, Department of Paediatrics, Division of Haematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; L. Lee Dupuis, MScPhm, ACPR, PhD, Department of Pharmacy, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Conflicts of interest: Nothing to declare

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Pediatric Blood and Cancer Web site](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pbc.25955/epdf "Pediatric Blood and Cancer Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Supplementary materials are available from the [Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario Web site](http://www.pogo.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/BreakthroughRefractory_supp.pdf "Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on December 21, 2016. The information was not verified by the guideline developer. 

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

