---
title: "ACMG practice guideline: lack of evidence for MTHFR polymorphism testing."
id: 10031
---

# General

## Guideline Title

ACMG practice guideline: lack of evidence for _MTHFR_ polymorphism testing.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Hickey SE, Curry CJ, Toriello HV. ACMG practice guideline: lack of evidence for MTHFR polymorphism testing. Genet Med. 2013 Feb;15(2):153-6. [77 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23288205)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



####  American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) Recommendations 


  * 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( _MTHFR_ ) polymorphism genotyping should not be ordered as part of the clinical evaluation for thrombophilia or recurrent pregnancy loss. 
  * _MTHFR_ polymorphism genotyping should not be ordered for at-risk family members. 
  * A clinical geneticist who serves as a consultant for a patient in whom an _MTHFR_ polymorphism(s) is found should ensure that the patient has received a thorough and appropriate evaluation for his or her symptoms. 
  * If the patient is homozygous for the "thermolabile" variant c.665C→T, the geneticist may order a fasting total plasma homocysteine, if not previously ordered, to provide more accurate counseling. 
  * _MTHFR_ status does not change the recommendation that women of childbearing age should take the standard dose of folic acid supplementation to reduce the risk of neural tube defects as per the general population guidelines (Zacho et al., 2011; De Stefano et al., 2000; Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board, 1998; "Prevention of neural tube," 1991; Czeizel  & Dudás, 1992; "Recommendations for the use of folic acid," 1992; Toriello, 2011). 


## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Thrombophilia

## Guideline Category

- Assessment of Therapeutic Effectiveness
- Counseling
- Evaluation

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Hematology
- Medical Genetics
- Obstetrics and Gynecology

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To review the latest evidence on 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( _MTHFR_ ) polymorphism testing as part of a routine evaluation for thrombophilia

## Target Population



Women of childbearing age and patients at risk for thrombophilia

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( _MTHFR_ ) polymorphism testing (not recommended) 
  2. Evaluation of symptoms in patients in whom an _MTHFR_ polymorphism(s) is found 
  3. Fasting total plasma homocysteine 
  4. Folic acid supplementation 



## Major Outcomes Considered



Not stated

# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



The guideline authors searched PubMed and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews from January 1995 to the present. In the literature search, priority was given to original research, with highest emphasis on meta-analyses, followed by case-control and cohort studies. The Literature search excluded review articles, case reports, and articles in languages other than English. Bibliographies of articles deemed to be of the highest quality for their specific topic were combed for additional articles that may have been missed by the initial literature search. In addition, the guidelines of other professional bodies on the same, or related, topic were reviewed.

The databases were searched using the following terms: MTHFR, MTHFR polymorphism, MTHFR thermolabile variant, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, and hyperhomocysteinemia. Combined searches were done on specific questions of interest including: MTHFR and stroke, MTHFR and recurrent pregnancy loss, MTHFR and venous thromboembolism, and MTHFR and coronary artery disease. The same combined searches were done for hyperhomocysteinemia and stroke, etc.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p>Not applicable</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The articles were reviewed by the working group who provided expert consensus.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



Not applicable

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



The final manuscript was reviewed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) Policy & Practice Guideline Committee Members, followed by the Board of Directors, and then opened up for general college membership comment.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## References Supporting the Recommendations

- Czeizel AE, Dudas I. Prevention of the first occurrence of neural-tube defects by periconceptional vitamin supplementation. N Engl J Med. 1992 Dec 24;327(26):1832-5. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=1307234)
- De Stefano V, Casorelli I, Rossi E, Zappacosta B, Leone G. Interaction between hyperhomocysteinemia and inherited thrombophilic factors in venous thromboembolism. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2000;26(3):305-11. [32 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11011848)
- Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary reference intakes: thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, biotin, and choline. Washington (DC): National Academy Press; 1998.
- Prevention of neural tube defects: results of the Medical Research Council Vitamin Study. MRC Vitamin Study Research Group. Lancet. 1991 Jul 20;338(8760):131-7. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=1677062)
- Recommendations for the use of folic acid to reduce the number of cases of spina bifida and other neural tube defects. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1992 Sep 11;41(RR-14):1-7. [14 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=1522835)
- Toriello HV, Policy and Practice Guideline Committee of the American College of Medical. Policy statement on folic acid and neural tube defects. Genet Med. 2011 Jun;13(6):593-6. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=21552133)
- Zacho J, Yazdanyar S, Bojesen SE, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Nordestgaard BG. Hyperhomocysteinemia, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase c.677C>T polymorphism and risk of cancer: cross-sectional and prospective studies and meta-analyses of 75,000 cases and 93,000 controls. Int J Cancer. 2011 Feb 1;128(3):644-52. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20473868)

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of evidence supporting the recommendations is not specifically stated.

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate use of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( _MTHFR_ ) polymorphism testing in routine evaluation for thrombophilia

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Hickey SE, Curry CJ, Toriello HV. ACMG practice guideline: lack of evidence for MTHFR polymorphism testing. Genet Med. 2013 Feb;15(2):153-6. [77 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23288205)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Feb

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Authors_ : Scott E. Hickey, MD, FACMG, Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA; Cynthia J. Curry, MD, FACMG, Genetic Medicine Central California, University of California, San Francisco–Fresno, Fresno, California, USA; Helga V. Toriello, PhD, FACMG, Department of Pediatrics/Human Development, Spectrum Health Hospitals and College of Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) Web site](https://www.acmg.net/docs/MTHFR_gim2012165a_Feb2013.pdf "American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics \(ACMG\) Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



None available

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on November 19, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

