---
title: "The clinical utility of sperm DNA integrity testing: a guideline."
id: 10358
permalink: /:collection/10358
---

# General

## Guideline Title

The clinical utility of sperm DNA integrity testing: a guideline.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. The clinical utility of sperm DNA integrity testing: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2013 Mar 1;99(3):673-7. [45 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23391408)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the strength of the recommendations ( **Level A-C** ) are given at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


####  Summary 


  * Existing data do not support a consistent relationship between abnormal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity and reproductive outcomes 
  * At present, the results of sperm DNA integrity testing alone do not predict pregnancy rates achieved through natural conception or with intrauterine insemination (IUI), in vitro fertilization (IVF), or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). However, further re-search may lead to validation of the clinical utility of these tests. 




####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to recommend the routine use of sperm DNA integrity tests in the evaluation and treatment of the infertile couple ( **Level C** ). 


###  Definitions: 


**Level A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Level B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Level C** : There is insufficient evidence to support a recommendation, either for or against. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None available

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Male infertility

## Guideline Category

- Diagnosis
- Technology Assessment

## Clinical Specialty

- Medical Genetics
- Urology

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To assess the evidence pertaining to the clinical utility of sperm deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity testing and target areas that require more study

## Target Population



Infertile men

## Interventions and Practices Considered



The following sperm deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity tests were considered but there is insufficient evidence to recommend their routine use:

  * Sperm chromatin structure assay (SCSA) 
  * Deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dUTP) nick end labeling assay (TUNEL) 
  * Single-cell gel electrophoresis assay (COMET) 
  * Sperm chromatin dispersion test (SCD) 



## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Likelihood ratios 
  * Pregnancy and fertilization rates 
  * Association of sperm deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage with reproductive outcomes 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



A systematic literature search was performed using the search strategy: sperm AND (DNA OR chromatin) AND (fragmentation OR damage OR integrity) AND (pregnancy [title/abstract] OR embryo [title/abstract]) AND (Humans [mesh] AND English [language]) (204 citations). The search was restricted to MEDLINE citations published in the English language from 1966 to November 2011. Studies were eligible if they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the predictive potential using predictive statistics, meta-analyses, and relevant articles from bibliographies of identified articles.

## Number of Source Documents



The comprehensive literature search yielded 74 citations eligible for full review.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Level I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized controlled trial.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>
<p><strong>Level III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



 **Assessment of the Sperm Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) Integrity Testing Literature**

Review articles found during the comprehensive literature search were excluded, while meta analyses were included in the review. Twenty studies used the deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dUTP) nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay to assess deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity while 28 employed the sperm chromatin structure assay (SCSA) test. The single-cell gel electrophoresis assay (COMET) test was used in 9 papers while the sperm chromatin dispersion test (SCD) test was used in 5. Less commonly used assays were assessed in 5 or fewer publications.

Overall, there are no Level I studies as would be expected for a predictive diagnostic clinical test. In addition, there are few high-quality prospective studies recruiting consecutive patients validating previously established cut-points with gold standard fertility outcomes. Most studies present Level II-2 evidence or less. The majority of studies are hindered by small sample size, non-consecutive recruitment of patients, variable patient populations, lack of control for female factors (particularly age), weak statistical methodology in calculating threshold values and predictive ability of tests, and use of several different methods for assessing DNA damage.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



For a diagnostic test to be clinically useful the results must be reproducible, applicable to a given patient, and change the management of the patient. For tests of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity to be clinically important there must be an association of sperm DNA damage with reproductive outcomes. The literature was reviewed to answer the following questions:

  * Does the DNA integrity test predict male fertility with natural conception? 
  * Does the DNA integrity test predict pregnancy with intrauterine insemination (IUI)? 
  * Is DNA fragmentation predictive of pregnancy with in vitro fertilization (IVF)? 
  * Is DNA fragmentation predictive of pregnancy with IVF and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)? 
  * Is DNA fragmentation predictive of pregnancy loss? 



## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



**Level A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Level B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Level C** : There is insufficient evidence to support a recommendation, either for or against

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) have approved this report.

This document was reviewed by ASRM members and their input was considered in the preparation of the final document.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Proper use of sperm deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) integrity testing

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



  * Although this document reflects appropriate management of a problem encountered in the practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations. 
  * Sperm deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage is more common in infertile men and may contribute to poor reproductive performance. However, current methods for assessing sperm DNA integrity do not reliably predict treatment outcomes and cannot be recommended routinely for clinical use. 



# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. The clinical utility of sperm DNA integrity testing: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2013 Mar 1;99(3):673-7. [45 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23391408)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Mar 1

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Reproductive Medicine - Nonprofit Organization

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Guideline Committee



The Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : Samantha Pfeifer, M.D.; Jeffrey Goldberg, M.D.; Roger Lobo, M.D.; Michael Thomas, M.D.; Margareta Pisarska, M.D.; Eric Widra, M.D.; Mark Licht, M.D.; Jay Sandlow, M.D.; John Collins, M.D.; Marcelle Cedars, M.D.; Mitchell Rosen, M.D.; Michael Vernon, Ph.D.; Owen Davis, M.D.; Daniel Dumesic, M.D.; Clarisa Gracia, M.D., M.S.C.E.; William Catherino, M.D., Ph.D.; Randall Odem, M.D.; Kim Thornton, M.D.; Robert Rebar, M.D.; Andrew La Barbera, Ph.D.

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



All Committee members disclosed commercial and financial relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee who were found to have conflicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or development of this document.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](http://www.asrm.org/globalassets/asrm/asrm-content/news-and-publications/practice-guidelines/for-non-members/the_clinical_utility_of_sperm_dna_integrity_testing-noprint.pdf "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following is available:

  * CME credit related to this guideline is available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](https://store.asrm.org/Learn/FindACourse.aspx "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on June 27, 2014. The information was verified by the guideline developer on July 22, 2014. 

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

