---
title: "The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer."
id: 9751
permalink: /:collection/9751
---

# General

## Guideline Title

The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Evans JA, Early DS, Chandraskhara V, Chathadi KV, Fanelli RD, Fisher DA, Foley KQ, Hwang JH, Jue TL, Pasha SF, Sharaf R, Shergill AK, Dominitz JA, Cash BD. The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer. Gastrointest Endosc. 2013 Mar;77(3):328-34. [101 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23410694)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Jacobson BC, Hirota W, Baron TH, Leighton JA, Faigel DO. The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003 Jun;57(7):817-22.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the quality of the evidence (++++, +++O, ++OO, and +OOO) and for the strength of the recommendations ("recommends" or "suggests") are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


  1. The Practice Committee recommends endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and fine needle aspiration (FNA) (when indicated), in conjunction with cross-sectional imaging, for the accurate staging of esophageal carcinoma (+++O). 
  2. The Practice Committee suggests that endoscopic mucosal dissection (EMR) or endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) be used for the treatment and staging of nodular Barrett's esophagus (BE) and suspected intramucosal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (++OO). 
  3. The Practice Committee suggests that argon plasma coagulation (APC), heater probe, cryotherapy, or radiofrequency ablation not be used as monotherapy with curative intent for mucosal esophageal cancer (++OO). 
  4. The Practice Committee suggests that ablative techniques such as APC, heater probe, cryotherapy, or radiofrequency ablation may have a role in ablation of remaining high-risk tissue following resection (++OO). 
  5. The Practice Committee recommends that esophageal stent placement is the preferred method for palliation of dysphagia and fistulae secondary to esophageal cancer because it provides immediate and durable relief in the majority of patients (+++O). 
  6. The Practice Committee suggests that a variety of factors, including patient preferences, quality of life, and prognosis be addressed with the patient and family before initiating endoscopic palliation for esophageal malignancy (++OO). 




###  Definitions: 


####  GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) System for Rating the Quality of Evidence for Guidelines 
<table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="3" summary="Table: GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) System for Rating the Quality of Evidence for Guidelines">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th valign="top">
    Quality of Evidence
   </th>
   <th valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
   <th valign="top">
    Symbol
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    High quality
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    ++++
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Moderate quality
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    +++O
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Low quality
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    ++OO
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td valign="top">
    Very low quality
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    +OOO
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


Adapted from Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924-6. 


####  Recommendation Strength 


The strength of individual recommendations is based on both the aggregate evidence quality and an assessment of the anticipated benefits and harms. Weaker recommendations are indicated by phrases such as "the Practice Committee suggests," whereas stronger recommendations are typically stated as "the Practice Committee recommends." 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Esophageal cancer including:

  * Adenocarcinoma 
  * Squamous cell carcinoma 



## Guideline Category

- Evaluation
- Management

## Clinical Specialty

- Gastroenterology
- Oncology

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



  * To update the 2003 American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE) guidelines describing the endoscopic aspects of managing esophageal cancer 
  * To discuss diagnosis, staging, endoscopic treatments, and palliation of esophageal cancer 



## Target Population



Patients with suspected or confirmed esophageal cancer

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) in conjunction with cross-sectional imaging for staging of esophageal carcinoma 
  2. Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) or endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for staging and treatment of nodular Barrett's esophagus, intramucosal squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma 
  3. Ablative techniques following resection: 
    * Cryotherapy 
    * Argon plasma coagulation (APC) 
    * Heater probe treatment 
    * Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) 
  4. Esophageal stent placement for palliation 
  5. Evaluation of factors such as patient preferences, quality of life, and prognosis before initiating palliative therapy 



**Note** : APC, heater probe, cryotherapy, or radiofrequency ablation as monotherapy with curative intent for mucosal esophageal cancer was considered but not recommended.

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) 
  * Risk factors 
  * Sensitivity of diagnostic tests 
  * Predictive value of diagnostic tests 
  * Quality of life
  * Morbidity and mortality 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



In preparing this guideline, a search of the medical literature was performed for the years 1980 to 2012 by using PubMed. Additional references were obtained from the bibliographies of the identified articles and from recommendations of expert consultants. When few or no data exist from well-designed prospective trials, emphasis is given to results from large series and reports from recognized experts.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) System for Rating the Quality of Evidence for Guidelines</strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="3" cellpadding="5" summary="Table: GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) System for Rating the Quality of Evidence for Guidelines">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top">Quality of Evidence</th>
            <th valign="top">Definition</th>
            <th valign="top">Symbol</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top">High quality</td>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.</td>
            <td valign="top">++++</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top">Moderate quality</td>
            <td valign="top">Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.</td>
            <td valign="top">+++O</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top">Low quality</td>
            <td valign="top">Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.</td>
            <td valign="top">++OO</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top">Very low quality</td>
            <td valign="top">Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.</td>
            <td valign="top">+OOO</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p class="Note">Adapted from Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924-6.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Guidelines for appropriate use of endoscopy are based on a critical review of the available data and expert consensus at the time that the guidelines are drafted.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



The strength of individual recommendations is based on both the aggregate evidence quality and an assessment of the anticipated benefits and harms. Weaker recommendations are indicated by phrases such as "the Practice Committee suggests," whereas stronger recommendations are typically stated as "the Practice Committee recommends."

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This document is a product of the Standards of Practice Committee. The document was reviewed and approved by the Governing Board of the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate use of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer

## Potential Harms



  * Potential complications of endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) are bleeding, perforation, and stricture formation. Delayed bleeding is rare, but immediate, postresection bleeding can occur in 10% of patients. Perforation rates are reported to be less than 3%. Rates of stricture formation vary depending on the circumference and length of mucosa removed by EMR, but can occur in up to 37% of cases. 
  * Complications of cryotherapy include chest pain, dysphagia, and, rarely, perforation. 
  * Stent complications include intolerable chest pain, perforation, migration, tumor ingrowth, bleeding, and fistula formation. 
  * In one study, rates of migration (11% vs 2%), tissue reaction, and bleeding were all higher in the self-expandable plastic stents (SEPS) group. Self-expandable metal stents (SEMS) were noted to have higher rates of tumor overgrowth, fistula formation, and food impaction. Airway compromise after SEMS placement for a tracheoesophageal fistula has been reported and careful evaluation of the patient with a multidisciplinary approach and concomitant airway management should be considered before the procedure. 
  * Tissue sampling contamination may occur when the endoscope traverses the tumor and it must be appreciated that false positive fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is possible when detached malignant cells that are present within the gastrointestinal (GI) lumen are picked up by the needle. 



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements


  * Further controlled clinical studies may be needed to clarify aspects of this guideline. This guideline may be revised as necessary to account for changes in technology, new data, or other aspects of clinical practice. 
  * This guideline is intended to be an educational device to provide information that may assist endoscopists in providing care to patients. This guideline is not a rule and should not be construed as establishing a legal standard of care or as encouraging, advocating, requiring, or discouraging any particular treatment. Clinical decisions in any particular case involve a complex analysis of the patient's condition and available courses of action. Therefore, clinical considerations may lead an endoscopist to take a course of action that varies from these guidelines. 



# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- End of Life Care
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Evans JA, Early DS, Chandraskhara V, Chathadi KV, Fanelli RD, Fisher DA, Foley KQ, Hwang JH, Jue TL, Pasha SF, Sharaf R, Shergill AK, Dominitz JA, Cash BD. The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer. Gastrointest Endosc. 2013 Mar;77(3):328-34. [101 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=23410694)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2003 Jun (revised 2013 Mar)

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy

## Guideline Committee



Standards of Practice Committee

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : John A. Evans, MD; Dayna S. Early, MD; Vinay Chandraskhara, MD; Krishnavel V. Chathadi, MD; Robert D. Fanelli, MD, SAGES Representative; Deborah A. Fisher, MD; Kimberly Q. Foley, RN, BSN, CGRN, SGNA Representative; Joo Ha Hwang, MD; Terry L. Jue, MD; Shabana F. Pasha, MD; Ravi Sharaf, MD; Amandeep K. Shergill, MD; Jason A. Dominitz, MD, MPH ( _Prior Chair_ ); Brooks D. Cash, MD __ ( _Committee Chair_ )

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Dr. Fisher, consultant for Epigenomics Inc. All other authors disclosed no financial relationships relevant to this publication.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline updates a previous version: Jacobson BC, Hirota W, Baron TH, Leighton JA, Faigel DO. The role of endoscopy in the assessment and treatment of esophageal cancer. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003 Jun;57(7):817-22.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available in Portable Document Format (PDF) from the [American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE) Web site](http://www.asge.org/uploadedFiles/Publications_%28public%29/Practice_guidelines/The%20role%20of%20endoscopy%20in%20the%20assessment%20and%20treatment%20of%20esophageal%20cancer.pdf "American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Web site").

Print copies: Available from the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, 1520 Kensington Road, Suite 202, Oak Brook, IL 60523

## Availability of Companion Documents



None available

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI on March 23, 2005. The information was verified by the guideline developer on March 31, 2005. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on June 5, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

