---
title: Best evidence statement (BESt). Promoting family satisfaction during care level transition.
id: 9992
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Best evidence statement (BESt). Promoting family satisfaction during care level transition.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Promoting family satisfaction during care level transition. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Jul 23. 5 p. [11 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The strength of the recommendation (strongly recommended, recommended, or no recommendation) and the quality of the evidence (1a‒5b) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


It is strongly recommended that nursing staff use standardized information to educate patients and families prior to transfer, on the anticipated environmental changes and care delivery routines that they will experience upon transfer from an intensive care unit (ICU) to a general floor to decrease anxiety (Brooke et al., 2012 [1a]) and increase satisfaction (Bailey et al., 2010, [4a]; Herrera-Espineira et al., 2009, [4b]; Rahmqvist, 2001 [4a]). 


> **Note 1** : Patient and caregiver anxiety was found to be inversely correlated with patient/caregiver satisfaction (Rahmqvist, 2001 [4a]; Herrera-Espineira et al., 2009 [4b]). 
> 
> **Note 2** : Increased informational support as perceived by patients and families is positively correlated with satisfaction of care (Bailey et al., 2010 [4a]). 


###  Definitions: 


####  Table of Evidence Levels 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table of Evidence Levels">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Quality Level
   </th>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    1a† or 1b†
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Systematic review, meta-analysis, or meta-synthesis of multiple studies
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    2a or 2b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Best study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    3a or 3b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Fair study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    4a or 4b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    5a or 5b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    General review, expert opinion, case report, consensus report, or guideline
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    5
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Local Consensus
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


†a = good quality study; b = lesser quality study 


####  Table of Language and Definitions for Recommendation Strength 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table of Recommendation Strength">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Language for Strength
   </th>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    It is strongly recommended that…
    <br/>
    <br/>
    It is strongly recommended that…not…
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is high support that benefits clearly outweigh risks and burdens (or visa-versa for negative recommendations).
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    It is recommended that…
    <br/>
    <br/>
    It is recommended that… not…
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is moderate support that benefits are closely balanced with risks and burdens.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="2" scope="row" valign="top">
    There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation…
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


**Note** : See the original guideline document for the dimensions used for judging the strength of the recommendation. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Any condition requiring transfer from a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), cardiac intensive care unit (CICU), or neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) to a general pediatric medical/surgical unit

## Guideline Category

- Counseling
- Management

## Clinical Specialty

- Critical Care
- Nursing
- Pediatrics
- Surgery

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To evaluate, among inpatients who are transferred from a higher to lesser level of care, does a standardized written approach to anticipatory preparation of the transfer compared to non-standardized preparation effect patient, family, or caregivers reported level of satisfaction

## Target Population



Infants and children in an inpatient setting, transferring from pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), cardiac intensive care unit (CICU), or neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) to general pediatric medical/surgical unit for the first time

## Interventions and Practices Considered



Standardized written approach to anticipatory preparation

**Note** : Standardized anticipatory preparation is defined as the development of set written information for patients and families that is routinely distributed prior to transfer of the patient out of the intensive care unit (ICU) to a general care floor to educate and inform families of the changes to expect in the environment, care practices, specific floor policies, and bedside staffing.

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Improved patient experience 
  * Reduced patient/family anxiety 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Search Strategy**

  * **Databases** : CINAHL, PubMed, PsycINFO 
  * **Search Terms** : inpatients, caregivers, parent, family, pediatric, transition, ICU, intensive care, preparation, guidance, education, information, satisfaction, perception, experience, outcomes, anxiety, stress, patient satisfaction, relocation stress 
  * **Limits, Filters, Search Dates** : English 
  * **Date Search Done** : 1998-2013 



## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Table of Evidence Levels</strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table of Evidence Levels">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Quality Level</th>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Definition</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">1a&dagger; or 1b&dagger;</td>
            <td valign="top">Systematic review, meta-analysis, or meta-synthesis of multiple studies</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">2a or 2b </td>
            <td valign="top">Best study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">3a or 3b </td>
            <td valign="top">Fair study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">4a or 4b </td>
            <td valign="top">Weak study design for domain </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5a or 5b </td>
            <td valign="top">General review, expert opinion, case report, consensus report, or guideline </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5</td>
            <td valign="top">Local Consensus</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p class="Note">&dagger;a = good quality study; b = lesser quality study</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Table of Language and Definitions for Recommendation Strength**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Language for Strength
</th>  
<th>

Definition
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

It is strongly recommended that…   
  
It is strongly recommended that…not…
</td>  
<td>

When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is high support that benefits clearly outweigh risks and burdens (or visa-versa for negative recommendations).
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

It is recommended that…  
  
It is recommended that… not…
</td>  
<td>

When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is moderate support that benefits are closely balanced with risks and burdens.
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation…
</td> </tr> </table>

**Note** : See the original guideline document for the dimensions used for judging the strength of the recommendation.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This Best Evidence Statement (BESt) has been reviewed against quality criteria by two independent reviewers from the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Evidence Collaboration.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## References Supporting the Recommendations

- Bailey JJ, Sabbagh M, Loiselle CG, Boileau J, McVey L. Supporting families in the ICU: a descriptive correlational study of informational support, anxiety, and satisfaction with care. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2010 Apr;26(2):114-22. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20106664)
- Brooke J, Hasan N, Slark J, Sharma P. Efficacy of information interventions in reducing transfer anxiety from a critical care setting to a general ward: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Crit Care. 2012 Aug;27(4):425.e9-15. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=22824085)
- Herrera-Espineira C, Rodriguez del Aguila Mdel M, Rodriguez del Castillo M, Valdivia AF, Sanchez IR. Relationship between anxiety level of patients and their satisfaction with different aspects of healthcare. Health Policy. 2009 Jan;89(1):37-45. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=18550203)
- Rahmqvist M. Patient satisfaction in relation to age, health status and other background factors: a model for comparisons of care units. Int J Qual Health Care. 2001 Oct;13(5):385-90. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11669566)

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Improved patient experience and reduced family/patient anxiety during first-time care level transition

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This Best Evidence Statement addresses only key points of care for the target population; it is not intended to be a comprehensive practice guideline. These recommendations result from review of literature and practices current at the time of their formulation. This Best Evidence Statement does not preclude using care modalities proven efficacious in studies published subsequent to the current revision of this document. This document is not intended to impose standards of care preventing selective variances from the recommendations to meet the specific and unique requirements of individual patients. Adherence to this Statement is voluntary. The clinician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient must make the ultimate judgment regarding the priority of any specific procedure.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



 **Applicability Issues**

Standard educational content needs to be developed to ensure parent and caregiver confidence before and during a transfer out of the intensive care unit (ICU). One avenue, which is supported by the literature, for this to be achieved is the use of a written format, such as a pamphlet or brochure. Unit staff or management will need to determine who will be accountable to distribute and discuss the information (i.e., sending unit, receiving unit). The pamphlet must be distributed within a realistic time frame that provides ample time for family and patients to read and have questions answered prior to transfer. The pamphlet needs to be easily tailored to individual unit environment specifics. Other modalities to educate families, such as a video for the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) TV channel or a standardized unit tour can additionally be used to improve the parent or caregiver's anxiety and confidence during and after a transfer out of the ICU.

## Implementation Tools

- Audit Criteria/Indicators

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better

## IOM Domain

- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Promoting family satisfaction during care level transition. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Jul 23. 5 p. [11 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Jul 23

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center - Hospital/Medical Center

## Source(s) of Funding



Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

No external funding was received for development of this Best Evidence Statement (BESt).

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Team Leader/Author_ : Michelle M. Coleman, MN, RN, CPN

_Team Members_ : Patti Besuner, MN, CNS, Center for Professional Excellence, Research and Evidence-Based Practice; Kathy Dressman, RN, MS, NEA-BC

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Conflict of interest declaration forms are filed with the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Evidence-Based Decision Making (EBDM) group. No financial or intellectual conflicts of interest were found.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Judging the strength of a recommendation. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Jan. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/judgingrecommendationstrength%20717.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 
  * Grading a body of evidence to answer a clinical question. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 1 p. 
  * Table of evidence levels. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Feb 29. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/table%20of%20evidence%20levels%20-%20legend.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 



In addition, suggested process or outcome measures are available in the [original guideline document](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on December 2, 2013.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original full-text guideline, which is subject to the following copyright restrictions:

Copies of this Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Best Evidence Statement (BESt) are available online and may be distributed by any organization for the global purpose of improving child health outcomes. Examples of approved uses of CCHMC's BESt include the following:

  * Copies may be provided to anyone involved in the organization's process for developing and implementing evidence-based care guidelines. 
  * Hyperlinks to the CCHMC website may be placed on the organization's website. 
  * The BESt may be adopted or adapted for use within the organization, provided that CCHMC receives appropriate attribution on all written or electronic documents. 
  * Copies may be provided to patients and the clinicians who manage their care. 



Notification of CCHMC at [EBDMInfo@cchmc.org](mailto:EBDMInfo@cchmc.org) for any BESt adopted, adapted, implemented or hyperlinked to by a given organization and/or user, is appreciated.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

