---
title: "Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline."
id: 11144
permalink: /:collection/11144
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2016 Dec;106(7):1634-47. [113 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=27678032)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the level of the evidence ( **Level I-III** ) and strength of the recommendations ( **Grade A-C** ) are given at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Who Is at High Risk for Moderate and Severe Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS)? 


####  Summary Statements 


  * There is fair evidence ( **level II-2** ) that polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), elevated antimüllerian hormone (AMH) values, peak estradiol levels, multifollicular development, and a high number of oocytes retrieved are associated with an increased risk of OHSS. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * While cut points require validation, AMH values  >3.4 ng/mL, antral follicle count (AFC) >24, development of ≥25 follicles, estradiol values >3,500 pg/mL, or ≥24 oocytes retrieved are particularly associated with an increased risk of OHSS. ( **Grade B** ) 




###  Prevention of OHSS 


####  Does the Type of Stimulation Protocol Influence the Risk of OHSS? 


#####  Summary Statements 


  * There is good evidence to support the use of ovarian stimulation protocols using gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists in order to reduce the risk of OHSS. ( **Grade A** ) 
  * There is insufficient evidence that clomiphene independently reduces OHSS risk. ( **Grade C** ) 




####  Can Aspirin Reduce the Risk of OHSS? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is fair evidence that aspirin reduces the incidence of OHSS based on a single randomized trial comparing aspirin alone with no treatment and another study comparing combined acetylsalicylic acid and steroid treatment with no treatment. ( **Grade B** ) 


####  Can Metformin Reduce the Risk of OHSS? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is good evidence that metformin decreases the risk of OHSS risk in PCOS patients. ( **Grade A** ) 


####  Can Coasting Reduce the Risk of OHSS? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is insufficient evidence to recommend coasting for the prevention of OHSS. ( **Grade C** ) 


####  Choice of Trigger for Final Oocyte Maturation Prior to Retrieval 


#####  Summary Statements 


  * There is insufficient evidence to recommend a lower dose of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) to trigger oocyte maturation for reduction in OHSS risk based on one underpowered randomized trial. ( **Grade C** ) 
  * There is good evidence to recommend the use of a GnRH agonist to trigger oocyte maturation prior to oocyte retrieval in order to reduce the risk of OHSS. ( **Grade A** ) 
  * There is good evidence that live-birth rates are lower in fresh autologous cycles after GnRH trigger, but not donor-recipient cycles. ( **Grade A** ) 
  * There is fair evidence that reproductive outcomes are improved when a low dose of hCG is co-administered at the time of GnRH agonist trigger for luteal support. ( **Grade B** ) 




####  Dopamine Agonist 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is good evidence that dopamine agonist administration starting at the time of hCG trigger for several days reduces the incidence of OHSS. ( **Grade A** ) 


####  Can Albumin Prevent OHSS Risk? 


#####  Summary Statement 


Given mixed results in the literature, there is insufficient evidence to conclusively state that albumin lowers the risk of OHSS. ( **Grade C** ) 


####  Can Calcium Prevent OHSS Risk? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is fair evidence that calcium lowers OHSS risk. ( **Grade B** ) 


####  Can Cryopreservation Prevent OHSS Risk? 


#####  Summary Statement 


Based on the results of two small randomized controlled trials (RCTs), there is fair evidence that cryopreservation prevents OHSS. ( **Grade B** ) 


**Can Miscellaneous Treatments Prevent OHSS Risk** ? 


There are insufficient data to make recommendations regarding the use of luteal antagonist administration, letrozole, methylprednisolone, intramuscular progesterone, or ketoconazole to mitigate OHSS risk. 


###  Treatment of OHSS 


####  Does Outpatient Paracentesis of Women with OHSS Improve Their Outcome? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is fair evidence to recommend paracenteses or culdocenteses for the management of OHSS in an outpatient setting. ( **Grade B** ) 


####  Do Volume Expanders Improve Outcome for Women with OHSS? 


#####  Summary Statement 


There is insufficient evidence to support the use of volume expanders alone for the treatment of OHSS ( **Grade C** ). The studies reporting use of volume expanders in OHSS treatment have not been uniform in treatment protocols. Some use diuretics and others include dopamine. 


###  Recommendations 


  * Women with PCOS, elevated AMH values, and elevated AFC may benefit from ovarian stimulation protocols that reduce the risk of OHSS. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * Ovarian stimulation protocols using GnRH antagonists are preferable in women at high risk of OHSS. ( **Grade A** ) 
  * The use of a GnRH agonist to trigger oocyte maturation prior to oocyte retrieval is recommended to reduce the risk of OHSS if peak estradiol levels are high or multifollicular development occurs during stimulation. ( **Grade A** ) Low-dose hCG co-trigger, luteal hormonal support, or cryopreservation of embryos are strategies that may improve pregnancy rates in this setting. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * Dopamine agonist administration starting at the time of hCG trigger for several days also may be used to reduce the incidence of OHSS. ( **Grade A** ) 
  * Additional strategies to prevent OHSS which may be helpful include the use of metformin in PCOS patients ( **Grade A** ), aspirin administration ( **Grade A** ), and cryopreservation of embryos. ( **Grade B** ) 
  * The mainstay of OHSS treatment includes fluid resuscitation and prophylactic anticoagulation. Paracentesis or culdocentesis may be recommended for management of OHSS when a large amount of ascites is present. ( **Grade B** ) 




###  Definitions 


####  Level of Evidence 


**Level I** : Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial. 


**Level II-1** : Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization. 


**Level II-2** : Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group. 


**Level II-3** : Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence. 


**Level III** : Opinions of respected authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees. 


####  Strength of Recommendations 


**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 


**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)

## Guideline Category

- Prevention
- Risk Assessment
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Endocrinology
- Obstetrics and Gynecology
- Preventive Medicine

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To identify who is at high risk, how to prevent ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), and the treatment for existing OHSS

## Target Population



Female patients undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation with gonadotropins during assisted reproduction

## Interventions and Practices Considered



 **Risk Assessment**

  1. Demographic factors (age, body mass index, race, infertility diagnosis, presence or absence of polycystic ovary syndrome [PCOS]) 
  2. Ovarian reserve markers (antral follicle count, antimüllerian hormone [AMH] levels, inhibin A/B levels) 
  3. Ovarian stimulation parameters (follicles, oocytes, estradiol) 



**Prevention**

  1. Type of stimulation protocol (gonadotropin-releasing hormone [GnRH] antagonist versus GnRH agonist) 
  2. Aspirin 
  3. Metformin 
  4. Choice of trigger for final oocyte maturation prior to retrieval 
  5. Dopamine agonist (cabergoline) 
  6. Calcium 
  7. Cryopreservation of embryos 



**Treatment**

  1. Paracentesis or culdocenteses 



**Note** : The following were considered but there was insufficient evidence to make a recommendation for prevention of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS): clomiphene, coasting, lower dose of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), albumin, luteal antagonist administration, letrozole, methylprednisolone, intramuscular progesterone, or ketoconazole. Volume expanders were considered for treatment but there was insufficient evidence to make a recommendation.

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) (serum estradiol concentrations, serum antimüllerian hormone [AMH] levels, antral follicle count [AFC]) 
  * Incidence of OHSS 
  * Pregnancy, implantation, and live birth rates 
  * Duration of hospitalization 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



A systematic review of the literature was performed in the electronic database MEDLINE through PubMed, with a filter for human subject and English research, on September 10, 2015.

A combination of the following medical subject headings or text words were used: acetylsalicylic acid, age, albumin, ASA, ascites, aspirin, BMI, body mass index, calcium, clinical trial, clomiphene, enoxaparin, freeze, freeze-all, heparin, "last 5 years," Lovenox, obes*, metformin, OHSS, ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, paracentesis, prevention, prednisolone, prednisone, risk factors, *stimulation, treatment (limited to "clinical trial"), and weight*.

Initially, titles and abstracts of potentially relevant articles were screened and reviewed for inclusion/exclusion criteria. Protocols and results of the studies were examined according to specific inclusion criteria. Only studies that met the inclusion criteria were assessed in the final analysis. Studies were eligible if they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the effectiveness of a procedure correlated with an outcome measure (pregnancy, implantation, or live-birth rates); meta-analyses; and relevant articles from bibliographies of identified articles.

**Summary of the Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Include
</th>  
<th>

Exclude
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Level 1, 2-1, 2-2 studies
</td>  
<td>

Level 3 studies: series, case reports, reviews, opinions, off topic
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Level 2-3 studies only for question 3 (due to paucity of available data)
</td>  
<td>

Level 2-3 (questions 1 and 2)
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Human studies
</td>  
<td>

Animal studies
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

English
</td>  
<td>

Non-English
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Studies with a comparison group
</td>  
<td>

Studies without a comparison group
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

In vitro fertilization (IVF) studies
</td>  
<td>

Non-IVF studies; intrauterine insemination (IUI) studies; in vitro maturation (IVM) studies
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

≥10 ovarian OHSS events (observational); any OHSS events (randomized controlled trials [RCTs])
</td>  
<td>

<10 OHSS events (observational)
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Studies that address clinical risk factors
</td>  
<td>

Studies that address only serum markers
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

Studies that assess antimüllerian hormone (AMH) as a marker
</td>  
<td>

Studies that focus on type of gonadotropin used
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>

 
</td>  
<td>

Studies that assess glucocorticoids
</td> </tr> </table>

Four members of an independent task force reviewed the full articles of all citations that possibly matched the predefined selection criteria. Final inclusion or exclusion decisions were made on examination of the articles in full. Disagreements about inclusion among reviewers were discussed and solved by consensus or arbitration after consultation with an independent reviewer/epidemiologist.

Systematic reviews/meta-analyses were individually considered and included if they followed a strict methodological process and assessed relevant evidence.

## Number of Source Documents



The electronic search and examination of reference lists from primary and review articles yielded 1,245 studies, of which 144 studies were included.

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">Level of Evidence</span></strong></p>
<p><strong>Level I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed randomized, controlled trial.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-1</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-2</strong>: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.</p>
<p><strong>Level II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled trials might also be regarded as this type of evidence.</p>
<p><strong>Level III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The quality of the evidence was evaluated using the grading system found in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field and is assigned for each reference in the bibliography (see the original guideline document).

Systematic reviews/meta-analyses were individually considered and included if they followed a strict methodological process and assessed relevant evidence.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



The literature was reviewed to answer the following questions:

  * Who is at high risk for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)? 
  * How can we prevent OHSS? 
  * Treatment for OHSS? 



## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



**Strength of Recommendations**

**Grade A** : There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade B** : There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

**Grade C** : There is insufficient evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This document was reviewed by American Society for Reproductive Medicine members, and their input was considered in the preparation of the final document. The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine have approved this report.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Identifying women who are at high risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is essential to lowering, and potentially eliminating, the incidence of OHSS.

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This report was developed under the direction of the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine as a service to its members and other practicing clinicians. Although this document reflects appropriate management of a problem encountered in the practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Foreign Language Translations
- Patient Resources
- Staff Training/Competency Material

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness
- Safety

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline. Fertil Steril. 2016 Dec;106(7):1634-47. [113 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=27678032)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2016 Dec

## Guideline Developer(s)

- American Society for Reproductive Medicine - Nonprofit Organization

## Source(s) of Funding



American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Guideline Committee



Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Committee Members_ : Samantha Pfeifer, MD; Samantha Butts, MD, MSCE; Daniel Dumesic, MD; Gregory Fossum, MD; Clarisa Gracia, MD, MSCE; Andrew La Barbera, PhD; Jennifer Mersereau, MD, MSCI; Randall Odem, MD; Richard Paulson, MD; Alan Penzias, MD; Margareta Pisarska, MD; Robert Rebar, MD; Richard Reindollar, MD; Mitchell Rosen, MD; Jay Sandlow, MD; Michael Vernon, PhD; Eric Widra, MD

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



All Committee members disclosed commercial and financial relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee who were found to have conflicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or development of this document.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](http://www.asrm.org/globalassets/asrm/asrm-content/news-and-publications/practice-guidelines/for-non-members/Prevention_and_treatment_of_moderate_and_severe_ovarian_hyperstimulation_syndrome_noprint "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



Continuing medical education (CME) credit related to this guideline is available from the [American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site](https://store.asrm.org/Default.aspx?TabID=1533 "American Society for Reproductive Medicine Web site"). 

## Patient Resources



The following is available:

  * Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). Fact sheet. Birmingham (AL): American Society for Reproductive Medicine; 2014. 1 p. Available from the [ReproductiveFacts Web site](http://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-and-publications/patient-fact-sheets-and-booklets/fact-sheets-and-info-booklets/ovarian-hyperstimulation-syndrome-ohss/ "ReproductiveFacts Web site \(English Version\)"). Also available in Spanish from the [ReproductiveFacts Web site](http://www.reproductivefacts.org/globalassets/rf/news-and-publications/bookletsfact-sheets/spanish-fact-sheets-and-info-booklets/sindrome_de_hiperstimulacion_ovarica_sho-spanish.pdf "ReproductiveFacts Web site \(Spanish Version\)"). 



Please note: This patient information is intended to provide health professionals with information to share with their patients to help them better understand their health and their diagnosed disorders. By providing access to this patient information, it is not the intention of NGC to provide specific medical advice for particular patients. Rather we urge patients and their representatives to review this material and then to consult with a licensed health professional for evaluation of treatment options suitable for them as well as for diagnosis and answers to their personal medical questions. This patient information has been derived and prepared from a guideline for health care professionals included on NGC by the authors or publishers of that original guideline. The patient information is not reviewed by NGC to establish whether or not it accurately reflects the original guideline's content.

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on March 27, 2017. The information was verified by the guideline developer on April 17, 2017.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

