---
title: "Best practices to minimize risk of infection with intrauterine device insertion."
id: 10294
permalink: /:collection/10294
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Best practices to minimize risk of infection with intrauterine device insertion.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Caddy S, Yudin MH, Hakim J, Money DM, Infectious Disease Committee. Best practices to minimize risk of infection with intrauterine device insertion. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2014 Mar;36(3):266-74. [66 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=24612897)

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The quality of evidence assessment ( **I-III** ) and classification of recommendations ( **A-D, L** ) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


###  Risk of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) After Insertion 


#####  Recommendation 


  1. All women requesting an intrauterine device (IUD) should be counselled about the small increased risk of PID in the first 20 days after insertion. ( **II-2A** ) 




###  Role of and Indications for Screening for Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) 


#####  Recommendation 


  2. All women requesting an IUD should be screened by both history and physical examination for their risk of STI. Women at increased risk should be tested prior to or at the time of insertion; however, it is not necessary to delay insertion until results are returned. ( **II-2B** ) 




###  Bacterial Vaginosis 


#####  Recommendation 


  3. Not enough current evidence is available to support routine screening for bacterial vaginosis at the time of insertion of an IUD in asymptomatic women. ( **II-2C** ) 




###  Role of Prophylactic Antibiotics 


#####  Recommendation 


  4. Routine use of prophylactic antibiotics is not recommended prior to IUD insertion, although it may be used in certain high-risk situations. ( **I-C** ) 




###  Insertion Technique 


#####  Recommendation 


  5. Standard practice includes cleansing the cervix and sterilizing any instruments that will be used prior to and during insertion of an IUD. ( **III-C** ) 




####  Management of PID with IUD In Situ 


#####  Recommendation 


  6. In treating mild to moderate PID, it is not necessary to remove the IUD during treatment unless the patient requests removal or there is no clinical improvement after 72 hours of appropriate antibiotic treatment. In cases of severe PID, consideration can be given to removing the IUD after an appropriate antibiotic regimen has been started. ( **I-B** ) 




###  Special Populations 


####  Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-Positive Women 


#####  Recommendation 


  7. An IUD is a safe, effective option for contraception in an HIV-positive woman. ( **I-B** ) 




####  Adolescents 


#####  Recommendation 


  8. An IUD can be considered a first-line contraceptive agent in adolescents. ( **I-A** ) 




###  Definitions: 


####  Quality of Evidence Assessment* 


**I** : Evidence obtained from at least one properly randomized controlled trial 


**II-1** : Evidence from well-designed controlled trials without randomization 


**II-2** : Evidence from well-designed cohort (prospective or retrospective) or case-control studies, preferably from more than one centre or research group 


**II-3** : Evidence obtained from comparisons between times or places with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the results of treatment with penicillin in the 1940s) could also be included in this category 


**III** : Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees 


*Adapted from the Evaluation of Evidence criteria described in the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. 


####  Classification of Recommendations† 


**A.** There is good evidence to recommend the clinical preventive action 


**B.** There is fair evidence to recommend the clinical preventive action 


**C.** The existing evidence is conflicting and does not allow to make a recommendation for or against use of the clinical preventive action; however, other factors may influence decision-making 


**D.** There is fair evidence to recommend against the clinical preventive action 


**E.** There is good evidence to recommend against the clinical preventive action 


**L.** There is insufficient evidence (in quantity or quality) to make a recommendation; however, other factors may influence decision-making 


†Adapted from the Classification of Recommendations criteria described in the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None available

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Infection (pelvic inflammatory disease [PID]) caused by intrauterine devices (IUDs)

## Guideline Category

- Counseling
- Management
- Risk Assessment
- Screening

## Clinical Specialty

- Family Practice
- Infectious Diseases
- Obstetrics and Gynecology

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To review the risk of infection with the insertion of intrauterine devices (IUDs) and recommend strategies to prevent infection

## Target Population



Women requesting an intrauterine device (IUD)

## Interventions and Practices Considered



  1. Counseling on pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) risks 
  2. History and physical examination 
  3. Assessment of risks for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
  4. Insertion of intrauterine device (IUD) 
    * Cleansing the cervix and sterilizing instruments 
    * Removal in cases of severe PID 
  5. Use in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive women and adolescents 



**Note** : The following interventions were considered but either not recommended or there was not enough current evidence available to support a recommendation:

  * Routine screening for bacterial vaginosis 
  * Routine use of use of prophylactic antibiotics 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Risk of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
  * Impact of screening for bacterial vaginosis and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) including chlamydia and gonorrhea 
  * Role of prophylactic antibiotics 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Searches of Electronic Databases
- Searches of Unpublished Data

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



Published literature was retrieved through searches of PubMed, EMBASE, and The Cochrane Library on July 21, 2011, using appropriate controlled vocabulary (e.g., intrauterine devices, pelvic inflammatory disease) and key words (e.g., adnexitis, endometritis, IUD). An etiological filter was applied in PubMed. The search was limited to the years 2000 forward. There were no language restrictions.

Grey (unpublished) literature was identified through searching the web sites of national and international medical specialty societies.

## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Quality of Evidence Assessment*</strong></p>
<p><strong>I</strong>: Evidence obtained from at least one properly randomized controlled trial</p>
<p><strong>II-1</strong>: Evidence from well-designed controlled trials without randomization</p>
<p><strong>II-2</strong>: Evidence from well-designed cohort (prospective or retrospective) or case-control studies, preferably from more than one centre or research group</p>
<p><strong>II-3</strong>: Evidence obtained from comparisons between times or places with or without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the results of treatment with penicillin in the 1940s) could also be included in this category</p>
<p><strong>III</strong>: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees</p>
<p class="Note">*Adapted from The Evaluation of Evidence criteria described in the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Review of Published Meta-Analyses
- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



The quality of evidence in this document was rated using the criteria described in the Report of the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (see the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" field).

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Classification of Recommendations †**

**A**. There is good evidence to recommend the clinical preventive action

**B**. There is fair evidence to recommend the clinical preventive action

**C**. The existing evidence is conflicting and does not allow to make a recommendation for or against use of the clinical preventive action; however, other factors may influence decision-making

**D**. There is fair evidence to recommend against the clinical preventive action

**E**. There is good evidence to recommend against the clinical preventive action

**L**. There is insufficient evidence (in quantity or quality) to make a recommendation; however, other factors may influence decision-making

†Adapted from the Classification of Recommendations criteria described in the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This committee opinion has been prepared by the Infectious Disease Committee, reviewed by the Family Practice Advisory Committee, the Registered Nurse Advisory Committee, the Aboriginal Health Initiative, and the Canadian Paediatric and Adolescent Gynaecology and Obstetricians Committee, and approved by the Executive and Council of the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate practices to minimize risk of infection with intrauterine device (IUD) insertion

## Potential Harms



  * When sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing first and delaying insertion to a follow-up appointment, consideration must be given to the likelihood of the patient being able to return, and the potential benefit of decreasing the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) from 0–5% to 0–2% must be weighed against the risk of unintended pregnancy during this time. 
  * The role of poor aseptic technique in the risk of PID after intrauterine device (IUD) insertion is not well-known, but it is well documented in other areas including puerperal and postabortion infection. Intrauterine microbial contamination is highest in the first month of insertion and decreases with time. The risk of potentially infectious vectors being introduced into the cavity at the time of IUD insertion is long established; however, this risk is short-lived. 



# Contraindications

## Contraindications



The World Health Organization (WHO) lists current pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), purulent cervicitis, and current chlamydial or gonorrheal infection, among others, as absolute contraindications to the insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD).

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This document reflects emerging clinical and scientific advances on the date issued and is subject to change. The information should not be construed as dictating an exclusive course of treatment or procedure to be followed. Local institutions can dictate amendments to these opinions. They should be well documented if modified at the local level. None of these contents may be reproduced in any form without prior written permission of the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC).

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Foreign Language Translations

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Staying Healthy

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Caddy S, Yudin MH, Hakim J, Money DM, Infectious Disease Committee. Best practices to minimize risk of infection with intrauterine device insertion. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2014 Mar;36(3):266-74. [66 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=24612897)

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2014 Mar

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada - Medical Specialty Society

## Source(s) of Funding



Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada

## Guideline Committee



Infectious Disease Committee

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Principal Authors_ : Sheila Caddy, MD, Edmonton AB; Mark H. Yudin, MD, Toronto ON; Julie Hakim, MD, Ottawa ON; Deborah M. Money, MD, Vancouver BC

_Infectious Disease Committee_ : Mark H. Yudin, MD ( _Chair_ ), Toronto ON; Victoria M. Allen, MD, Halifax NS; Céline Bouchard, MD, Quebec QC; Marc Boucher, MD, Montreal QC; Sheila Caddy, MD, Edmonton AB; Eliana Castillo, MD, Calgary AB; Deborah M. Money, MD, Vancouver BC; Kellie E. Murphy, MD, Toronto ON; Gina Ogilvie, MD, Vancouver BC; Caroline Paquet, RM, Trois-Rivieres QC

_Special Contributor_ : Wendy V. Norman, MD, Vancouver BC

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Disclosure statements have been received from all contributors.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Electronic copies: Available from the [Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) Web site](http://sogc.org/guidelines/best-practices-minimize-risk-infection-intrauterine-device-insertion/ "Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada Web site"). Also available in French from the [SOGC Web site](http://sogc.org/fr/guidelines/pratiques-optimales-en-vue-de-minimiser-le-risque-dinfection-au-moment-de-linsertion-dun-dispositif-intra-uterin/ "Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada Web site").

Print copies: Available from the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada, La société des obstétriciens et gynécologues du Canada (SOGC) 780 promenade Echo Drive Ottawa, ON K1S 5R7 (Canada); Phone: 1-800-561-2416.

## Availability of Companion Documents



None available

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on May 7, 2014. The information was verified by the guideline developer on June 4, 2014.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

