---
title: "Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on surgical resection for the treatment of patients with vestibular schwannomas."
id: 11357
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on surgical resection for the treatment of patients with vestibular schwannomas.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Hadjipanayis CG, Carlson ML, Link MJ, Rayan TA, Parish J, Atkins T, Asher AL, Dunn IF, Corrales CE, Van Gompel JJ, Sughrue M, Olson JJ. Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on surgical resection for the treatment of patients with vestibular schwannomas. Neurosurgery. 2018 Feb 1;82(2):E40-3. [20 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=29309632 )

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

# NEATS Assessment

## Disclosure of Guideline Funding Source

- Yes

## Disclosure and Management of Financial Conflict of Interests

- 4

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Multidisciplinary Group

- Yes

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Methodologist Involvement

- Unknown

## Guideline Development Group Composition: Patient and Public Perspectives

- 1

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Search Strategy

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Study Selection

- 5

## Use of a Systematic Review of Evidence: Synthesis of Evidence

- 4

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Grading the Quality or Strength of Evidence

- 3

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Benefits and Harms of Recommendations

- 4

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Evidence Summary Supporting Recommendations

- 5

## Evidence Foundations for and Rating Strength of Recommendations: Rating the Strength of Recommendations

- 4

## Specific and Unambiguous Articulation of Recommendations

- 5

## External Review

- 1

## Updating

- 3

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



Definitions for the classification of evidence ( **I-III** ) and levels of recommendations ( **1-3** ) are provided at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


Please see the full-text version of this guideline (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field) for the target population of each recommendation listed below. 


###  Question 1 


What surgical approaches for vestibular schwannomas (VSs) are best for complete resection and facial nerve (FN) preservation when serviceable hearing is present? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to support the superiority of either the MF or the RS approach for complete VS resection and FN preservation when serviceable hearing is present. 


###  Question 2 


Which surgical approach (RS or translabyrinthine [TL]) for VS is best for complete resection and FN preservation when serviceable hearing is not present? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to support the superiority of either the RS or the TL approach for complete VS resection and FN preservation when serviceable hearing is not present. 


###  Question 3 


Does VS size matter for facial and vestibulocochlear nerve preservation with surgical resection? 


####  Recommendation 


#####  Level 3: Patients with larger VS tumor size should be counseled about the greater than average risk of loss of serviceable hearing. 


###  Question 4 


Should small intracanalicular tumors ( <1.5 cm) be surgically resected? 


####  Recommendation 


There are insufficient data to support a firm recommendation that surgery be the primary treatment for this subclass of VSs. 


###  Question 5 


Is hearing preservation routinely possible with VS surgical resection when serviceable hearing is present? 


####  Recommendation 


#####  Level 3: Hearing preservation surgery via the MF or the RS approach may be attempted in patients with small tumor size (<1.5 cm) and good preoperative hearing. 


###  Question 6 


When should surgical resection be the initial treatment in patients with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence that surgical resection should be the initial treatment in patients with NF2. 


###  Question 7 


Does a multidisciplinary team, consisting of neurosurgery and neurotology, provide the best outcomes of complete resection and facial/vestibulocochlear nerve preservation for patients undergoing resection of VSs? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to support stating that a multidisciplinary team, usually consisting of a neurosurgeon and a neurotologist, provides superior outcomes compared to either subspecialist working alone. 


###  Question 8 


Does a subtotal surgical resection of a VS followed by stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) to the residual tumor provide comparable hearing and FN preservation to patients who undergo a complete surgical resection? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to support subtotal resection (STR) followed by SRS provides comparable hearing and FN preservation to patients who undergo a complete surgical resection. 


###  Question 9 


Does surgical resection of VS treat preoperative balance problems more effectively than SRS? 


####  Recommendation 


There is insufficient evidence to support either surgical resection or SRS for treatment of preoperative balance problems. 


###  Question 10 


Does surgical resection of VS treat preoperative trigeminal neuralgia more effectively than SRS? 


####  Recommendation 


#####  Level 3: Surgical resection of VSs may be used to better relieve symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia than SRS. 


###  Question 11 


Is surgical resection of VSs more difficult (associated with higher facial neuropathies and STR rates) after initial treatment with SRS? 


####  Recommendation 


#####  Level 3: If microsurgical resection is necessary after SRS, it is recommended that patients be counseled that there is an increased likelihood of a STR and decreased FN function. 


###  Definitions 


####  American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons Classification of Evidence on Therapeutic Effectiveness 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons of Evidence on Therapeutic Effectiveness">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" colspan="2" valign="top">
    Evidence Classification
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Class I Evidence
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence provided by one or more well-designed randomized controlled clinical trials, including overview (meta-analyses) of such trials
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Class II Evidence
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence provided by well-designed observational studies with concurrent controls (e.g., case-control and cohort studies)
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Class III Evidence
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Evidence provided by expert opinion, case series, case reports, and studies with historical controls
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


####  American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons Levels of Recommendation 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table: American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons Levels of Recommendation">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" colspan="2" valign="top">
    Levels of Recommendation
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Level 1
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Generally accepted principles for patient management, which reflect a high degree of clinical certainty (usually this requires class I evidence which directly addresses the clinical questions or overwhelming class II evidence when circumstances preclude randomized clinical trials)
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Level 2
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Recommendations for patient management which reflect clinical certainty (usually this requires class II evidence or a strong consensus of class III evidence)
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <th class="Center" scope="row" valign="top">
    <strong>
     Level 3
    </strong>
   </th>
   <td valign="top">
    Other strategies for patient management for which the clinical utility is uncertain (inconclusive or conflicting evidence or opinion)
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Vestibular schwannomas

## Guideline Category

- Assessment of Therapeutic Effectiveness
- Treatment

## Clinical Specialty

- Neurological Surgery
- Neurology
- Otolaryngology

## Intended Users

- Physicians

## Guideline Objective(s)



To assess both comparative and noncomparative studies of surgical management of vestibular schwannomas (VSs)

## Target Population



  * Adults with sporadic vestibular schwannomas (VSs) who underwent microsurgical resection or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) treatment
  * Adults with both sporadic and neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) VSs undergoing microsurgical resection
  * Patients meeting diagnostic criteria for NF2



## Interventions and Practices Considered


  1. Complete surgical resection 
  2. Counseling 
  3. Hearing preservation surgery 



**Note** : The following interventions were considered but not recommended due to insufficient evidence:

  * Multidisciplinary team 
  * Subtotal resection followed by stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) 



## Major Outcomes Considered


  * Facial/vestibulocochlear nerve function 
  * Hearing preservation rates
  * Patient perceived disability in regards to hearing loss 
  * Quality of life 
  * Tumor control rates
  * Balance/vestibular dysfunction 
  * Trigeminal neuralgia symptoms 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Search Method**

The task force collaborated with a medical librarian to search for articles published from January 1990 through 2014. Two electronic databases, PubMed and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (see the full guideline for search strategies [see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field]), were searched. Strategies for searching electronic databases were constructed by the evidence-based clinical practice guideline taskforce members and the medical librarian using standard strategies to identify relevant studies.

The authors supplemented the searches of electronic databases with manual screening of the bibliographies of all retrieved publications. The authors also searched the bibliographies of recent systematic reviews and other review articles for potentially relevant citations. All articles identified were subject to the study selection criteria listed below. As noted above, the guideline committee also examined lists of included and excluded studies for errors and omissions. The authors went to great lengths to obtain a complete set of relevant articles. Having a complete set ensured that this guideline is not based on a biased subset of articles.

**Study Selection and Eligibility Criteria**

A total of 2949 citations were manually reviewed by the team with specific inclusion and exclusion criteria as outlined below. Two independent reviewers evaluated and abstracted full-text data for each article, and the 2 sets of data were compared for agreement by a third party. Inconsistencies were re-reviewed, and disagreements were resolved by consensus. Citations that considered adult patients focusing on surgical treatment of VSs were considered. To be included in this guideline, an article must be a report of a study that:

  * Investigated patients suspected of having vestibular schwannomas (VSs) 
  * Patients ≥18 years of age 
  * Was of humans 
  * Published between January 1, 1990 and December 31, 2014 
  * Quantitatively presented results 
  * Was not an in vitro study (for novel molecular markers, in vitro studies were included on patient samples) 
  * Was not a biomechanical study 
  * Was not performed on cadavers 
  * Was published in English 
  * Was not a meeting abstract, editorial, letter, or commentary 
  * Studies may include mixed pathology; however, the data pertaining to VSs was abstractable from the paper 
  * Had >5 patients or patient samples 



The authors did not include systematic reviews, guidelines, or meta-analyses conducted by others. These documents are developed using different inclusion criteria than those specified in this guideline. Therefore, they may include studies that do not meet the inclusion criteria specified above. These documents were recalled if their abstract suggested that they might address one of the recommendations, and their bibliographies were searched for additional studies.

## Number of Source Documents



One hundred forty-seven studies were included as evidence. See Figure 1 in the full guideline (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong><span style="text-decoration: underline;">American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons Classification of Evidence on Therapeutic Effectiveness </span></strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table: American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons of Evidence on Therapeutic Effectiveness">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" colspan="2">Evidence Classification</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Class I Evidence</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">Evidence provided by one or more well-designed randomized controlled clinical trials, including overview (meta-analyses) of such trials</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Class II Evidence</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">Evidence provided by well-designed observational studies with concurrent controls (e.g., case-control and cohort studies)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th class="Center" valign="top" scope="row"><strong>Class III Evidence</strong></th>
            <td valign="top">Evidence provided by expert opinion, case series, case reports, and studies with historical controls</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<tr />
    <tbody />
        <tr />
            <td valign="top" />
            <tr />
                <td valign="top" />
                <tr />
                    <td valign="top" /></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review with Evidence Tables

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



 **Data Collection Process**

The abstracts that met the selection criteria were retrieved in full-text form. Each article's adherence to the selection criteria was confirmed. To determine how the data could be classified, the information in the full-text articles were then evaluated to determine whether they were providing results of therapy or were more centered on diagnostic or prognostic information. Agreement on these assessments and on the salient points regarding the type of study design and objectives, and the conclusions and data classification was then reached by exchanging drafts and comments by e-mail. The information was then used for construction of the evidence tables.

**Assessment for Risk of Bias**

All the literature reviewed was class III evidence (i.e., evidence from nonexperimental descriptive studies, such as comparative studies, correlation studies, and case-control studies). Because the data analyzed were all class III, bias could be present because of selective case choice for study and selective results reporting, lack or loss of information over time, the biases of the interpreting investigator in regard to the study, publication bias regarding positive studies or positive cases, misclassification, survivorship bias, publication bias, recognition that data collected in this retrospective or prospective manner does not imply causation, selection bias, attrition bias, change in methods over time, ascertainment bias, hidden agenda bias, and variability caused by random error related to problems with unintentional data entry oversight and neglect.

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus (Nominal Group Technique)

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



 **Writing Group and Question Establishment**

The evidence-based clinical practice guideline taskforce members and the Joint Tumor Section of the American Association of Neurological Surgeons (AANS) and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS) have prioritized writing the guidelines for management of vestibular schwannomas (VSs). A series of authors for the development of guidelines related to surgical management of VSs were identified and screened for conflict of interest. This group in turn agreed on a set of questions addressing the topic at hand and conducted a systematic review of the literature relevant to the surgical management of VSs. Additional details of the systematic review are provided within the introduction and methodology chapter of the original guideline document (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

**Classification of Evidence and Guideline Recommendation Formulation**

The concept of linking evidence to recommendations has been further formalized by the American Medical Association (AMA) and many specialty societies, including AANS, CNS, and the American Academy of Neurology (AAN). This formalization involves the designation of specific relationships between the strength of evidence and the strength of recommendations to avoid ambiguity. In the paradigm for therapeutic maneuvers, evidence is classified according to the scheme in the "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence" and "Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations" fields). A basis for these guidelines can be viewed in the Joint Guidelines Committee methodology document (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

**Guideline Panel Consensus**

Multidisciplinary writing groups were created for each section based on author expertise to address each of the disciplines and particular areas of therapy selected for these clinical guidelines. Each group was involved with literature selection, creation and editing of the evidence tables, and scientific foundations for their specific section and discipline. Using this information, the writing groups then drafted the recommendations in answer to the questions formulated at the beginning of the process, culminating in the clinical practice guideline for their respective discipline. The draft guidelines were then circulated to the entire clinical guideline panel to allow for multidisciplinary feedback, discussion, and ultimately approval.

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons Levels of Recommendation**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Levels of Recommendation
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**Level 1**
</th>  
<td>

Generally accepted principles for patient management, which reflect a high degree of clinical certainty (usually this requires class I evidence which directly addresses the clinical questions or overwhelming class II evidence when circumstances preclude randomized clinical trials)
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**Level 2**
</th>  
<td>

Recommendations for patient management which reflect clinical certainty (usually this requires class II evidence or a strong consensus of class III evidence)
</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<th>

**Level 3**
</th>  
<td>

Other strategies for patient management for which the clinical utility is uncertain (inconclusive or conflicting evidence or opinion)
</td> </tr> </table>

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Internal Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



 **Approval Process**

The completed evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the management of vestibular schwannomas (VSs) were presented to the Joint Guideline Committee (JGC) of the American Association of Neurological Surgeons (AANS) and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS) for review. The reviewers for the JGC were vetted by _Neurosurgery_ for suitability and expertise to serve as reviewers for the purposes of publication in that journal also. The final product was then approved and endorsed by the executive committees of both the AANS and CNS before publication in _Neurosurgery_.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Appropriate use of surgical resection to treat patients with vestibular schwannomas (VSs)

## Potential Harms



  * It should be noted that in expert hands hearing loss or complications can occur with surgery. 
  * In one study, the authors described how using various classification systems to measure the postoperative hearing can give a false sense of success.



# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



**Disclaimer of Liability**

This clinical systematic review and evidence-based guideline was developed by a multidisciplinary physician volunteer task force and serves as an educational tool designed to provide an accurate review of the subject matter covered. These guidelines are disseminated with the understanding that the recommendations by the authors and consultants who have collaborated in their development are not meant to replace the individualized care and treatment advice from a patient's physician(s). If medical advice or assistance is required, the services of a competent physician should be sought. The proposals contained in these guidelines may not be suitable for use in all circumstances. The choice to implement any particular recommendation contained in these guidelines must be made by a managing physician in light of the situation in each particular patient and on the basis of existing resources.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



An implementation strategy was not provided.

## Implementation Tools

- Quick Reference Guides/Physician Guides

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better
- Living with Illness

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Hadjipanayis CG, Carlson ML, Link MJ, Rayan TA, Parish J, Atkins T, Asher AL, Dunn IF, Corrales CE, Van Gompel JJ, Sughrue M, Olson JJ. Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on surgical resection for the treatment of patients with vestibular schwannomas. Neurosurgery. 2018 Feb 1;82(2):E40-3. [20 references] [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=29309632 )

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2018 Feb 1

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Congress of Neurological Surgeons - Professional Association

## Source(s) of Funding



These evidence-based clinical practice guidelines were funded exclusively by the Congress of Neurological Surgeons and the Tumor Section of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons and the American Association of Neurological Surgeons, which received no funding from outside commercial sources to support the development of this document.

## Guideline Committee



Vestibular Schwannoma Evidence-Based Practice Guideline Task Force

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Task Force Members_ : Constantinos G. Hadjipanayis, MD, PhD, Department of Neurosurgery, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Matthew L. Carlson, MD, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota; Michael J. Link, MD, Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Tarek A. Rayan, MD, PhD, Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; John Parish, MD, Department of Neurosurgery, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, North Carolina; Tyler Atkins, MD, Department of Neurosurgery, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, North Carolina; Anthony L. Asher, MD, Carolina Neurosurgery and Spine Associates, Charlotte, North Carolina; Ian F. Dunn, MD, Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; C. Eduardo Corrales, MD, Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Jamie J. Van Gompel, MD, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota; Michael Sughrue, MD, Department of Neurosurgery, University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Jeffrey J. Olson, MD, Department of Neurosurgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



 **Conflict of Interest**

The Vestibular Schwannoma Guidelines Task Force members were required to report all possible conflicts of interest (COIs) prior to beginning work on the guideline, using the COI disclosure form of the American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons (AANS/CNS) Joint Guidelines Committee, including potential COIs that are unrelated to the topic of the guideline. The CNS Guidelines Committee and Guideline Task Force Chair reviewed the disclosures and either approved or disapproved the nomination. The CNS Guidelines Committee and Guideline Task Force Chair are given latitude to approve nominations of Task Force members with possible conflicts and address this by restricting the writing and reviewing privileges of that person to topics unrelated to the possible COIs. The conflict of interest findings are provided in detail in the full-text introduction and methods manuscript (see the "Availability of Companion Documents" field).

## Guideline Endorser(s)

- American Association of Neurological Surgeons - Medical Specialty Society

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

This guideline meets NGC's 2013 (revised) inclusion criteria.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Neurosurgery Web site](https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article/82/2/E40/4764047 "Neurosurgery Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on surgical resection for the treatment of patients with vestibular schwannomas. Full guideline. Schaumburg (IL): Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS); 2017 Dec 22. 116 p. Available from the [Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS) Web site](https://www.cns.org/guidelines/guidelines-management-patients-vestibular-schwannoma/chapter_8 "Congress of Neurological Surgeons \(CNS\) Web site"). 
  * Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on the treatment of adults with vestibular schwannomas: introduction and methods. Schaumburg (IL): Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS); 2017 Dec 22. 28 p. Available from the [CNS Web site](https://www.cns.org/guidelines/guidelines-management-patients-vestibular-schwannoma/chapter_1 "CNS Web site"). 
  * Olson JJ, Kalkanis SN, Ryken TC. Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic review and evidence-based guidelines on the treatment of adults with vestibular schwannomas: executive summary. Neurosurgery. 2018 Feb 1;82(2):129-34. Available from the [Neurosurgery Web site](https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article/82/2/129/4764052 "Neurosurgery Web site"). 
  * Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS). Guideline development methodology: endorsed by the American Association of Neurological Surgeons (AANS), the Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS), and the AANS/CNS Joint Guideline Committee. Schaumburg (IL): Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS); 2012 Feb. 12 p. Available from the [CNS Web site](https://www.cns.org/sites/default/files/jgcguidelinedevelopmentmethodology.pdf "CNS Web site"). 



## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on May 7, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on June 4, 2018.

This NEATS assessment was completed by ECRI Institute on April 25, 2018. The information was verified by the guideline developer on June 4, 2018.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original guideline, which is subject to the guideline developer's copyright restrictions.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

