---
title: "Best evidence statement (BESt). Providing most effective child life care for patients having general anesthesia."
id: 10064
---

# General

## Guideline Title

Best evidence statement (BESt). Providing most effective child life care for patients having general anesthesia.

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Providing most effective child life care for patients having general anesthesia. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Aug 13. 5 p. [7 references]

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

# Recommendations

## Major Recommendations



The strength of the recommendation (strongly recommended, recommended, or no recommendation) and the quality of the evidence (1a‒5b) are defined at the end of the "Major Recommendations" field. 


It is recommended that children receiving general anesthesia in a medical facility be provided with coping strategies to decrease maladaptive behaviors post-operatively (Gorayeb et al., 2009 [2b]; Zastowny, Kirschenbaum, & Meng, 1986 [2b]). 


**Notes** : Studies also showed a decrease in a child's anxiety when provided with coping strategies pre-operatively (Farrell et al., 2013 [2a]; Li, Lopez,  & Lee, 2007 [2a]; Kain et al., 1998 [2a]; Gorayeb et al., 2009 [2b]; Zastowny, Kirschenbaum, & Meng, 1986 [2b]; Brewer et al., 2006 [3a]). Additionally, studies showed an increase in child cooperation with the use of coping strategies (Farrell et al., 2013 [2a], Zastowny, Kirschenbaum, & Meng, 1986 [2b]). 


###  Definitions: 


**Table of Evidence Levels**
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table of Evidence Levels">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Quality Level
   </th>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    1a† or 1b†
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Systematic review, meta-analysis, or meta-synthesis of multiple studies
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    2a or 2b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Best study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    3a or 3b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Fair study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    4a or 4b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Weak study design for domain
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    5a or 5b
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    General review, expert opinion, case report, consensus report, or guideline
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    5
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    Local Consensus
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


†a = good quality study; b = lesser quality study 


####  Table of Language and Definitions for Recommendation Strength 
<table border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="1" summary="Table of Recommendation Strength">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Language for Strength
   </th>
   <th scope="col" valign="top">
    Definition
   </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    <p>
     It is strongly recommended that…
    </p>
    <p>
     It is strongly recommended that…not…
    </p>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <p>
     When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is high support that benefits clearly outweigh risks and burdens (or vice versa for negative recommendations).
    </p>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td scope="row" valign="top">
    <p>
     It is recommended that…
    </p>
    <p>
     It is recommended that… not…
    </p>
   </td>
   <td valign="top">
    <p>
     When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is moderate support that benefits are closely balanced with risks and burdens.
    </p>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td colspan="2" scope="row" valign="top">
    <p>
     There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation…
    </p>
   </td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>


**Note** : See the original guideline document for the dimensions used for judging the strength of the recommendation. 
## Clinical Algorithm(s)



None provided

# Scope

## Disease/Condition(s)



Any disease or condition requiring surgery with general anesthesia

## Guideline Category

- Counseling
- Management

## Clinical Specialty

- Anesthesiology
- Family Practice
- Nursing
- Pediatrics
- Psychology
- Surgery

## Intended Users

- Advanced Practice Nurses
- Allied Health Personnel
- Hospitals
- Nurses
- Physician Assistants
- Physicians
- Psychologists/Non-physician Behavioral Health Clinicians
- Social Workers

## Guideline Objective(s)



To evaluate, among children undergoing general anesthesia, if providing coping strategies to patients versus verbal preparation only decreases maladaptive behavior post-operatively as reported by parents

## Target Population



Children ages 2 to 12 years having general anesthesia within a medical facility

## Interventions and Practices Considered



Providing coping strategies to patients pre-operatively

## Major Outcomes Considered



  * Decreased maladaptive behavior post-operatively 
  * Child anxiety post-intervention and post-operatively 
  * Increased child cooperation 



# Methodology

## Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence

- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Primary Sources)
- Hand-searches of Published Literature (Secondary Sources)
- Searches of Electronic Databases

## Description of Methods Used to Collect/Select the Evidence



**Search Strategy**

  * **Databases** : PsycINFO, MEDLINE, CINAHL, Google Scholar, hand searched references of relevant articles 
  * **Search Terms** : Surgery, maladaptive behaviors, preoperative anxiety, coping skills, coping, postoperative period, pediatric surgery, therapeutic play, endoscopy 
  * **Limits, Filters, Search Dates** : English. Limited to articles from 1980 to 2013. 
  * **Date Last Search Done** : April 16, 2013. 



## Number of Source Documents



Not stated

## Methods Used to Assess the Quality and Strength of the Evidence

- Weighting According to a Rating Scheme (Scheme Given)

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Evidence

<div class="content_para"><p><strong>Table of Evidence Levels</strong></p>
<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="3" summary="Table of Evidence Levels">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Quality Level</th>
            <th valign="top" scope="col">Definition</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">1a&dagger; or 1b&dagger;</td>
            <td valign="top">Systematic review, meta-analysis, or meta-synthesis of multiple studies</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">2a or 2b </td>
            <td valign="top">Best study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">3a or 3b </td>
            <td valign="top">Fair study design for domain</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">4a or 4b </td>
            <td valign="top">Weak study design for domain </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5a or 5b </td>
            <td valign="top">General review, expert opinion, case report, consensus report, or guideline </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td valign="top" scope="row">5</td>
            <td valign="top">Local Consensus</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p class="Note">&dagger;a = good quality study; b = lesser quality study</p></div>

## Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence

- Systematic Review

## Description of the Methods Used to Analyze the Evidence



Not stated

## Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations

- Expert Consensus

## Description of Methods Used to Formulate the Recommendations



Not stated

## Rating Scheme for the Strength of the Recommendations



 **Table of Language and Definitions for Recommendation Strength**  
  
<table>  
<tr>  
<th>

Language for Strength
</th>  
<th>

Definition
</th> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



It is strongly recommended that…

It is strongly recommended that…not…


</td>  
<td>



When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is high support that benefits clearly outweigh risks and burdens (or vice versa for negative recommendations).


</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



It is recommended that…

It is recommended that… not…


</td>  
<td>



When the dimensions for judging the strength of the evidence are applied, there is moderate support that benefits are closely balanced with risks and burdens.


</td> </tr>  
<tr>  
<td>



There is insufficient evidence and a lack of consensus to make a recommendation…


</td> </tr> </table>

**Note** : See the original guideline document for the dimensions used for judging the strength of the recommendation.

## Cost Analysis



A formal cost analysis was not performed and published cost analyses were not reviewed.

## Method of Guideline Validation

- Peer Review

## Description of Method of Guideline Validation



This Best Evidence Statement (BESt) has been reviewed against quality criteria by two independent reviewers from the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Evidence Collaboration.

# Evidence Supporting the Recommendations

## References Supporting the Recommendations

- Brewer S, Gleditsch SL, Syblik D, Tietjens ME, Vacik HW. Pediatric anxiety: child life intervention in day surgery. J Pediatr Nurs. 2006 Feb;21(1):13-22. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16428010)
- Farrell MA, Parrish K, Ziemer K, Scarlett WG, Parker S, Martin KJ, Ahmed MI. The effects of child life intervention on reducing pediatric patients' anxiety and increasing cooperation in perioperative settings. Child Life Focus. 2013;31(2):1-8.
- Gorayeb RP, Petean EB, de Oliveira Pileggi F, Tazima Mde F, Vicente YA, Gorayeb R. Importance of psychological intervention for the recovery of children submitted to elective surgery. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Jul;44(7):1390-5. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19573667)
- Kain ZN, Caramico LA, Mayes LC, Genevro JL, Bornstein MH, Hofstadter MB. Preoperative preparation programs in children: a comparative examination. Anesth Analg. 1998 Dec;87(6):1249-55. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9842807)
- Li HC, Lopez V, Lee TL. Psychoeducational preparation of children for surgery: the importance of parental involvement. Patient Educ Couns. 2007 Jan;65(1):34-41. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16872785)
- Zastowny TR, Kirschenbaum DS, Meng AL. Coping skills training for children: effects on distress before, during, and after hospitalization for surgery. Health Psychol. 1986;5(3):231-47. [ PubMed ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3527691)

## Type of Evidence Supporting the Recommendations



The type of supporting evidence is identified and graded for each recommendation (see the "Major Recommendations" field).

# Benefits/Harms of Implementing the Guideline Recommendations

## Potential Benefits



Improved child coping strategies during general anesthesia may result in lower anxiety (family and child), reduced post-operative maladaptive behaviors, and increased cooperation.

## Potential Harms



Not stated

# Qualifying Statements

## Qualifying Statements



This Best Evidence Statement addresses only key points of care for the target population; it is not intended to be a comprehensive practice guideline. These recommendations result from review of literature and practices current at the time of their formulation. This Best Evidence Statement does not preclude using care modalities proven efficacious in studies published subsequent to the current revision of this document. This document is not intended to impose standards of care preventing selective variances from the recommendations to meet the specific and unique requirements of individual patients. Adherence to this Statement is voluntary. The clinician in light of the individual circumstances presented by the patient must make the ultimate judgment regarding the priority of any specific procedure.

# Implementation of the Guideline

## Description of Implementation Strategy



 **Applicability Issues**

Timing is often a potential concern as so much information needs to be communicated to the child and family before a child receives general anesthesia. All of the studies offered interventions that were 20 minutes or longer. Some of the research associated with better behavior outcomes, offered preparation and coping strategies prior to the day of surgery showed patients had less anxiety before induction after receiving coping strategies the day of receiving anesthesia.

Staff availability can also be a concern. If there are not currently resources in place for providing coping strategies, acquiring appropriate staff may be a necessary step. When possible, child life specialists should offer interventions/coping strategies as these healthcare professionals have received extensive training in child development and are not responsible for providing any medical care, thus making them a non-threatening member of a hospitalized child's healthcare team. Other disciplines such as nurses, and psychologists offered coping strategies in the literature as well as child life specialists.

## Implementation Tools

- Audit Criteria/Indicators

# Institute of Medicine (IOM) National Healthcare Quality Report Categories

## IOM Care Need

- Getting Better

## IOM Domain

- Effectiveness
- Patient-centeredness

# Identifying Information and Availability

## Bibliographic Source(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. Best evidence statement (BESt). Providing most effective child life care for patients having general anesthesia. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2013 Aug 13. 5 p. [7 references]

## Adaptation



Not applicable: The guideline was not adapted from another source.

## Date Released

2013 Aug 13

## Guideline Developer(s)

- Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center - Hospital/Medical Center

## Source(s) of Funding



Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

No external funding was received for development of this Best Evidence Statement.

## Guideline Committee



Not stated

## Composition of Group That Authored the Guideline



 _Team Leader/Author_ : Nikki Gosnell, BS, CCLS; Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Child Life and Integrative Care, Same Day Surgery and Vascular Access Team

_Support/Consultant_ : Barbara K. Giambra, PhD(c), MS, RN, CPNP, Evidence-Based Practice Mentor, Center For Professional Excellence, Research and Evidence-Based Practice

_Ad Hoc/Content Reviewers_ : Cathie Marshall, BS, AA, CCLS Clinical Manager, Division of Child Life and Integrative Care

_Patient/Family/Parent or Other Parent Organization_ : Jodi Kelley, Parent of patient in Same Day Surgery

## Financial Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest



Conflict of interest declaration forms are filed with the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Evidence-Based Decision Making (EBDM) group. No financial conflicts of interest were found.

## Guideline Status



This is the current release of the guideline.

## Guideline Availability



Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Web site").

## Availability of Companion Documents



The following are available:

  * Judging the strength of a recommendation. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Jan. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/judgingrecommendationstrength%20717.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 
  * Grading a body of evidence to answer a clinical question. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 1 p. 
  * Table of evidence levels. Cincinnati (OH): Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center; 2008 Feb 29. 1 p. Available from the [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/-/media/cincinnati%20childrens/home/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/legend/table%20of%20evidence%20levels%20-%20legend.pdf?la=en "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center"). 



In addition, suggested process or outcome measures are available in the [original guideline document](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/service/j/anderson-center/evidence-based-care/recommendations/topic "Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center Web site").

## Patient Resources



None available

## NGC Status



This NGC summary was completed by ECRI Institute on January 20, 2014. This summary was updated by ECRI Institute on February 15, 2017 following the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory on general anesthetic and sedation drugs.

## Copyright Statement



This NGC summary is based on the original full-text guideline, which is subject to the following copyright restrictions:

Copies of this Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) Best Evidence Statement (BESt) are available online and may be distributed by any organization for the global purpose of improving child health outcomes. Examples of approved uses of the BESt include the following:

  * Copies may be provided to anyone involved in the organization's process for developing and implementing evidence based care. 
  * Hyperlinks to the CCHMC website may be placed on the organization's website. 
  * The BESt may be adopted or adapted for use within the organization, provided that CCHMC receives appropriate attribution on all written or electronic documents. 
  * Copies may be provided to patients and the clinicians who manage their care. 



Notification of CCHMC at [EBDMInfo@cchmc.org](mailto:EBDMInfo@cchmc.org) for any BESt adopted, adapted, implemented or hyperlinked by the organization is appreciated.

# Disclaimer

## NGC Disclaimer



The National Guideline Clearinghouse™ (NGC) does not develop, produce, approve, or endorse the guidelines represented on this site.

All guidelines summarized by NGC and hosted on our site are produced under the auspices of medical specialty societies, relevant professional associations, public or private organizations, other government agencies, health care organizations or plans, and similar entities.

Guidelines represented on the NGC Web site are submitted by guideline developers, and are screened solely to determine that they meet the [NGC Inclusion Criteria](/help-and-about/summaries/inclusion-criteria).

NGC, AHRQ, and its contractor ECRI Institute make no warranties concerning the content or clinical efficacy or effectiveness of the clinical practice guidelines and related materials represented on this site. Moreover, the views and opinions of developers or authors of guidelines represented on this site do not necessarily state or reflect those of NGC, AHRQ, or its contractor ECRI Institute, and inclusion or hosting of guidelines in NGC may not be used for advertising or commercial endorsement purposes.

Readers with questions regarding guideline content are directed to contact the guideline developer.

